Title: Can Language Model Agents be Helpful Circuit Explainers in Mechanistic Interpretability?

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.24026v1

Published Time: Wed, 24 Jun 2026 00:20:45 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
# Can Language Model Agents be Helpful Circuit Explainers in Mechanistic Interpretability? 

Ayan Antik Khan 1, Harsh Kohli 2, Yuekun Yao 2

Huan Sun 2, Ziyu Yao 1

> 1

George Mason University 2The Ohio State University 

{akhan265,ziyuyao}@gmu.edu {kohli.120,yao.1267,sun.397}@osu.edu 

Abstract 

Mechanistic interpretability has made substan-tial progress in automatically localizing circuits, but explaining what localized components do remains labor-intensive and difficult to stan-dardize. In this work, we study whether lan-guage model (LM) agents can assist with this explanation problem once a circuit has already been identified. We introduce AGENTIC IN-

> TERP

BENCH , a benchmark for circuit explana-tion built from 84 semi-synthetic transformer circuits with 163 component-level annotations. We propose HYVE (Hy pothesize, Validate, 

Explain), an agentic explainer that analyzes each component through an iterative loop of observation, hypothesis generation, and causal validation, eventually producing a component-level explanation and a circuit-level task de-scription. Across four LM backbones, H YVE recovers useful component- and task-level ex-planations, but no backbone is uniformly best. Our analysis shows that strong backbones usu-ally form observation-grounded hypotheses, while failures more often arise later in the val-idation loop, through incomplete validation plans, code execution errors, or unresolved hy-potheses. A case study on an arithmetic circuit in Llama-3-8B shows that the same formulation can extend beyond semi-synthetic benchmarks to naturally trained models. Overall, LM agents are promising circuit explainers, but reliable validation remains the key obstacle. 1

1 Introduction 

Mechanistic Interpretability (MI) seeks to reverse-engineer how language models (LMs) implement specific behaviors by identifying the underlying 

circuits , i.e., sub-networks of attention heads and MLP components that contribute to the model be-haviors (Rai et al., 2024; Bereska and Gavves, 

> 1

We release the benchmark dataset, source code, and prompts at https://github.com/Ziyu-Yao-NLP-Lab/ LLM-Circuit-Explainer .Component Roles      

> Decoder- only seq- to- seq Transformer
> (2 layers, 4 attn. heads per layer)
> H1 H2 H3 H4
> MLP
> L0
> H2 H3 H4
> MLP
> L1
> Localized
> Component
> Non- circuit
> component

=

=   

> H1
> Output = [0, 1/2, 1/3, 1/2]
> Task: returns the
> fraction of 'x' in the
> input up to the i- th
> position for all i
> L0_MLP (INDICATOR)
> detects whether the
> current token is 'x'
> L1H2 (AGGREGATOR)
> aggregates prefix
> fraction by attending
> to previous positions
> Legend
> Input = ['c', ' x', ' a', ' x' ]

Figure 1: An instance of the circuit explanation task on frac_prevs , a 2-layer transformer that computes the running fraction of token ‘x’. An agent receives the input-output examples and a localized circuit and must (i) assign each component a functional role (e.g., L0_MLP: INDICATOR, L1H2: AGGREGATOR) along with a natural-language role description and (ii) derive a task description of the overall model behavior. 

2024; Ferrando et al., 2024). While recent ad-vances have made circuit localization more effi-cient through automated patching and attribution methods (Conmy et al., 2023; Hanna et al., 2024; Syed et al., 2024), the explanation phase, i.e., un-derstanding the semantic roles of these components and their interactions, remains largely manual and difficult to scale. Human researchers typically con-duct iterative hypothesis generation and validation using established methods. Yet as models grow larger and more complex, this human-centered pro-cess becomes increasingly infeasible. Recent work has shown that LM agents can support open-ended scientific workflows by generating hypotheses, de-signing experiments, executing code, and refining conclusions from evidence (Chen et al., 2025; Lu 1

> arXiv:2606.24026v1 [cs.AI] 23 Jun 2026

et al., 2024; Yamada et al., 2025). Given that circuit explanation shares a similar loop, a natural ques-tion arises: Can LM agents assist in explaining the circuits within an LM? 

In this work, we explore whether LM agents can work as effective circuit explainers once a cir-cuit is localized. We focus on assessing the suf-ficiency and reliability of LMs in generating and validating explanations grounded in mechanistic evidence, an essential step toward scalable and au-tomated circuit understanding. To study this prob-lem in a controlled setting, we construct A GEN -

> TIC

INTERP BENCH , a benchmark comprising 84 localized circuits on semi-synthetic transformers that cover 163 transformer components, built on the InterpBench (Gupta et al., 2025). Each component is annotated with a functional role tag drawn from a 5-class taxonomy together with a natural-language description of its task-specific role. We further propose HYVE (Hy pothesize, 

Validate, Explain), an agent-based framework that explains a localized circuit through iterative obser-vation, hypothesis generation, and validation . We evaluate H YVE on A GENTIC INTERP BENCH using four frontier LMs as backbones: GPT-5.4 (Ope-nAI, 2026), Claude-Sonnet-4.6 (Anthropic, 2026), Gemini-3.1-Pro (Google DeepMind, 2026), and Qwen-3-Coder-30B-A3B-Instruct (Qwen, 2025). HYVE achieves up to 79% component tag accuracy and 83% task accuracy. The results show that LM agents can produce useful circuit explanations, but no backbone is uniformly best. Initial hypotheses are usually grounded for the stronger backbones, while the main failures arise later in the validation loop. GPT-5.4 produces the soundest validation plans, Claude-Sonnet-4.6 executes code most re-liably, and Gemini-3.1-Pro achieves the strongest judged explanation scores. These trends suggest that hypothesis generation may not be the main bottleneck by itself, yet reliable circuit explana-tion also depends on validation design and code execution. To evaluate whether H YVE generalizes beyond the semi-synthetic transformers of A GENTIC IN-

> TERP

BENCH , we conduct a case study on a realis-tic circuit for three-operand addition in Llama-3-8b (Mamidanna et al., 2025). Our experiment shows that H YVE can recover component roles in this set-ting: Claude-Sonnet-4.6 correctly explains 8 of 10 components, while GPT-5.4 gives 6 correct and 3 partially correct descriptions. Both models recover the main operand-transfer structure, while Claude also explains the causally redundant components. This case study complements A GENTIC INTERP -BENCH by testing H YVE in a more realistic set-ting, where the localized circuit comes from a nat-urally trained next-token prediction model. It also highlights a practical role for agentic explainers as tools for stress-testing existing circuit analyses and probing for missed mechanisms. 

2 Related Work 

Mechanistic Interpretability (MI) MI has largely advanced through detailed case studies that localize and explain circuits for specific model be-haviors. A landmark example is the IOI circuit of Wang et al. (2023), a 26-head circuit for indirect-object identification in GPT-2 small. A complemen-tary line of work studies arithmetic and algorithmic circuits in LMs, including greater-than comparison (Hanna et al., 2023) and helical number represen-tations (Kantamneni and Tegmark, 2025). In our work, we evaluate the generalizability of H YVE on the All-for-One (AF1) subgraph discovered by Mamidanna et al. (2025) for mental math. 

Automation in MI Early analyses relied solely on human-designed interventions to identify rel-evant model components. ACDC (Conmy et al., 2023) automates part of this process by pruning a model’s computational graph with intervention-based tests. EAP and EAP-IG (Syed et al., 2024; Hanna et al., 2024) further improve scalability by using attribution-based scores to identify important circuit edges. These methods increasingly auto-mate localization , but the subsequent explanation 

step still largely requires human analysis. Our work was motivated by the need to fill this gap. Similar to us, Paulo et al. (2024); Han et al. (2026); Liu et al. (2026); Marin-Llobet and Ferrando (2026) explore automated interpretability; however, they focus on explaining isolated features or neurons, while we target circuit explanation (i.e., explaining transformer components and how they connect to enable specific task performance). Finally, Bai et al. (2026) design agents to eval-uate MI findings against its underlying code, data, and evidence, while we create agents to perform 

MI research from scratch. 

Benchmarks in MI MIB (Mueller et al., 2025) evaluates circuit localization by reporting two met-rics derived from the faithfulness of the circuit against the full model. Tracr (Lindner et al., 2023) 2compiles RASP (Weiss et al., 2021) programs into transformers with known internal structure, which can then serve as the ground-truth circuits, and TracrBench (Thurnherr and Scheurer, 2024) scales this approach. InterpBench (Gupta et al., 2025) builds on this line by producing more realistic trans-formers with known circuits. These datasets, how-ever, are all evaluating the localization of circuits, yet benchmarking the explanation of circuit com-ponents remains widely understudied. In this line, FIND (Schwettmann et al., 2023) evaluates open-ended descriptions of black-box functions, but it does not center MI circuits. Our work fills this gap by proposing the first benchmark for agentic circuit explanation. Our benchmark was built on top of InterpBench, as described in Section 3. 

3 Benchmarking LLM Agents as Circuit Explainers 

In this section, we formulate the task of circuit ex-planation and describe A GENTIC INTERP BENCH .

3.1 Task Formulation 

Formally, let E = {(xk, y k)}mk=1 denote a set of task input-output examples illustrating the model’s behavior, and let C = {c1, c 2, . . . , c n} denote a localized circuit, where each ci is a circuit compo-nent such as an attention head or MLP sublayer. The agent’s task is to explain the functional role of each component and the task-level behavior imple-mented by the circuit. The agent produces three 

outputs. For each circuit component ci, it predicts (i) a role tag ti ∈ R summarizing the component’s abstract role, where R is the role taxonomy intro-duced in Section 3.2, and (ii) a natural-language note ni describing the task-specific behavior of ci.For the full circuit, it also produces (iii) a derived task description d characterizing the LM’s under-lying task. Figure 1 illustrates these inputs and outputs on the running example frac_prevs .

3.2 AGENTIC INTERP BENCH 

We introduce A GENTIC INTERP BENCH , a bench-mark for evaluating LLM agents on circuit explana-tion. A GENTIC INTERP BENCH consists of 84 trans-former circuits with 163 annotated components (Ta-ble 1). Notably, A GENTIC INTERP BENCH targets a circuit explanation setting in which the localized circuit is given and the agent must recover the role of each component. A GENTIC INTERP BENCH is built on InterpBench (Gupta et al., 2025), which           

> Statistic Count
> Benchmark tasks/circuits 84 Total MLP components 120 Total attention components 43 Avg./Min/Max #of components per circuit 1.94/1/10
> Role tag counts
> MAPPER 72 AGGREGATOR 32 COMBINER 33 ROUTER 11 INDICATOR 15

Table 1: Statistics of A GENTIC INTERP BENCH .

we briefly review before describing our annotation taxonomy and construction procedure. 

Background. InterpBench provides semi-synthetic transformers whose ground-truth circuits are known by design. It builds on Tracr (Lindner et al., 2023), a compiler that converts RASP programs (Weiss et al., 2021) into decoder-only transformers with fully transparent computational structure. To mitigate the unrealistic weight dis-tributions in Tracr-compiled models, InterpBench retrains Tracr models with Strict Interchange Intervention Training (SIIT), a procedure extended from IIT (Geiger et al., 2022) that aligns a low-level transformer with the Tracr-compiled circuit while penalizing contributions from non-circuit components. The resulting models exhibit weight distributions and activations close to those of naturally trained transformers, while preserving the same circuit components of their Tracr counterparts. We use the 84 RASP-derived models in Interp-Bench as the foundation for A GENTIC INTERP -BENCH .2 These tasks span small algorithmic be-haviors, including counting, fraction computation, sorting, and matching. Two properties make them well-suited for evaluating LMs as circuit explainers: (i) the ground-truth circuit and per-component role are recoverable from the RASP source, enabling precise evaluation, and (ii) the diversity of tasks re-duces the risk of the agent memorizing well-known circuits from prior literature. 

Dataset Annotation We build A GENTIC INTERP -BENCH by extending InterpBench with a semantic annotation layer for circuit explanation. For each localized component in an InterpBench model, we 

> 2We exclude the two IOI tasks, as IOI is a widely studied circuit and the agent may rely on memorized conclusions instead of grounded execution (Bai et al., 2026).

3inspect the corresponding RASP program and use InterpBench’s high-level/low-level correspondence map to trace the trained component back to the RASP variable it implements. This allows us to as-sign precise task-specific roles to each component. Specifically, each task in A GENTIC INTERP -BENCH is annotated with its task description, the original RASP program, five input-output exam-ples with inputs sampled from the task’s data dis-tribution and outputs obtained by executing the RASP program, and per-component role annota-tions . A role annotation consists of two fields: a 

tag , drawn from the 5-class taxonomy (I NDICATOR ,AGGREGATOR , R OUTER , M APPER , and C OM -

> BINER

) detailed in Appendix B, and a note , a brief natural-language description of the component’s task-specific role. Together, the two fields support evaluation at two granularities: whether the agent identifies the correct abstract role , and whether it can describe that role accurately in the task context. The annotation was manually performed and ex-amined against the original RASP program-circuit mapping to ensure quality. An example is shown in Figure 1. We include its corresponding RASP program and other details in Appendix C. 

3.3 Evaluation Metrics 

We evaluate an agent at three levels of granularity. At component-level , across all components, we report tag prediction accuracy (Acc tag ), the exact-match rate between the agent’s predicted tag and the ground-truth tag, and role description quality 

(Qdesc ), an LLM-judged score of the predicted role note against the ground-truth note. Specifically, the LLM-judge assesses the description quality on a 3-point scale (0 = incorrect, 1 = partially correct, 2 = correct). We use this scale to distinguish fully incorrect descriptions from partially correct ones that capture the main role but contain incorrect mechanistic sub-claims (an example is provided in Appendix E.7.1). We then rescale the score to [0 , 1] 

as Qdesc . At the task-level , for each task, we report 

derived task accuracy (Acc task ), a binary LLM-judged score of the agent’s derived task description against the ground-truth task description. Finally, at the process-level , we report code execution suc-cess rate (Sexec ), the fraction of execute_python 

calls that run without error. LLM-judged metrics ( Qdesc and Acc task ) are scored independently by two LLM judges, GPT-5.4 and Gemini-3.1-Pro. We aggregate the two scores by taking the lower score instead of the mean. This choice provides a conservative estimate of expla-nation quality, which fits our setting because over-crediting an incorrect mechanistic claim is more harmful than under-crediting an incomplete one. The lower-score aggregation also reduces the im-pact of self-preference bias, where LLM judges can favor their own generations (Panickssery et al., 2024). A high score is retained only when both judges assign it. To validate the LLM-judged metrics, we collect human ratings on a subset of 10 tasks containing 17 components. For each component, two human judges independently evaluate the outputs of all four H YVE backbones (Section 5), with agent iden-tities hidden and randomized. This results in a total of 68 component-level annotations. The judges score Qdesc and Acc task using the same rubrics as the LLM judges, and we observed a Cohen’s κ

of 0.83 for Qdesc and 0.96 for Acc task , indicating almost perfect inter-annotator agreement (Landis and Koch, 1977). As with the two LLM judges, we consider the lower score between the two human annotators as the ground-truth evaluation label, and report the LLM-human agreement. We observed substantial agreement for Qdesc (κ=0.76 ) and al-most perfect agreement for Acc task (κ=0.8), which confirms the validity of the LLM-judged metrics. We include details in Appendix E. 

4 HYVE 

In this section, we introduce H YVE, our LM agent for circuit explanation. 

4.1 Overview HYVE operates one component at a time. For each component in the localized circuit, it runs a three-stage analysis: observe, hypothesize, and validate . These three stages form an iterative loop. HYVE generates a hypothesis from its observa-tions, designs a controlled intervention to test it, and decides whether the evidence supports or re-futes the claim. If refuted, the loop returns to hypothesis generation with the refuted claim as additional context. After all components are pro-cessed, H YVE classifies each component, pro-duces a component-level explanation, and derives the task description. Figure 2 illustrates the full pipeline. 4Observation            

> Hypothesis
> Generation
> Hypothesis
> Validation Classification
> Plan Generation Validation Plan
> Generation
> Code
> Generation &
> Execution using
> Tools
> Hypothesis
> Generation
> (from
> observation)
> Verdict:
> "Refute Hypothesis "
> Verdict: " Support Hypothesis "Go to next component
> Code
> Generation &
> Execution using
> Tools
> Decision NL description
> Summarization
> -Circuit
> Information
> flow
> -Derived task
> description
> multiple
> rounds
> (optional)
> multiple
> rounds
> (optional)
> Indicator: ...
> Aggregator: ...
> ...
> Combiner: ...
> TAXONOMY Circuit Level
> Summarization
> Component
> Role Gen.
> -Tag
> -Note

Figure 2: HYVE’s pipeline . H YVE explains each localized component through an iterative observe → hypothesize 

→ validate loop. Refuted hypotheses are fed back as additional context to the next round. After processing all components, it assigns role tags and synthesizes a circuit-level summary. 

4.2 Observation 

The goal of observation is to gather descriptive evidence about a target component before hypoth-esizing its role. HYVE first writes a structured observation plan specifying the goal of the observa-tion, a step-by-step procedure, the required model tensors, and the expected pattern in the result. It then writes Python code implementing the plan, executes the code, and summarizes the results as a natural-language observation. We provide a helper library, observation_tools.py , with primitives for inspecting attention patterns and activations. HYVE may use these helpers, write custom code, or combine both. 

4.3 Hypothesis Generation 

After observation, H YVE proposes a hypothesis about the target component’s role. The hypothesis is a short natural-language claim grounded in the observation, the task input-output examples, and any previously refuted hypotheses. At this stage, the role taxonomy is withheld, allowing H YVE to reason freely about the component’s behavior before committing to a fixed label. 

4.4 Hypothesis Validation 

After a hypothesis is proposed, H YVE tests it through controlled interventions on the target com-ponent. It first writes a structured validation plan specifying the prediction being tested, a step-by-step procedure, the activations or hooks to inter-vene on, and the result that would support or refute the hypothesis. It then writes Python code imple-menting the plan, executes the code, and issues a binary decision based on the results. We pro-vide validation_tools.py , a helper library with primitives for ablation, activation patching, and in-terchange interventions. Similar to the observation stage, H YVE is free to use these primitives, write custom code, or combine both. If the evidence supports the hypothesis, H YVE moves on to the next component. If the evidence refutes it, the loop returns to hypothesis generation with the refuted claim added to the context, and H YVE proposes a revised hypothesis informed by what has been ruled out. 

4.5 Classification 

Once all components have been processed, H YVE assigns each one a tag from the taxonomy and writes a concise task-specific note describing the role of each component based on the validated hy-potheses. It receives the taxonomy together with the final hypothesis for each component, and se-lects the tag that best matches the component’s role in the circuit. Separating classification from hy-pothesis generation allows H YVE to reason about each component’s behavior before committing to a fixed label. Introducing the taxonomy earlier could produce more taxonomy-aligned descriptions, but it would also constrain the agent’s reasoning to the available tags, which we deliberately avoid. 

4.6 Summarization 

After classification, HYVE synthesizes the component-level explanations into a circuit-level account of how the localized circuit implements the task. The summary contains two parts: First, a short description of how information flows be-tween components, which serves as an intermedi-ate step that externalizes H YVE’s findings; Second, a derived task description inferred from the vali-5Granularity Metric GPT-5.4 Claude-Sonnet-4.6 Gemini-3.1 Pro Qwen-3-Coder-30B-A3B                    

> Component-level Acc tag 0.74 0.79 0.76 0.67
> Qdesc 0.46 0.58 0.59 0.25 Task-level Acc task 0.63 0.75 0.83 0.25 Process-level Sexec 0.52 0.93 0.80 0.62
> Table 2: Results of H YVE with different LM backbones on A GENTIC INTERP BENCH . Higher is better for all metrics. Bold indicates the best score in each row.

dated hypotheses and the task input-output exam-ples. Only the derived task description is evaluated. It tests whether H YVE can move beyond isolated component labels and recover the behavior imple-mented by the circuit as a whole, given that no task description was provided. 

4.7 Implementation 

HYVE is implemented as a graph-based state machine using LangGraph (LangChain AI, 2024). Observation and Hypothesis Validation 

stages share the same tool-calling procedure: 

list_directory and read_file for inspecting the helper libraries (built using TransformerLens (Nanda and Bloom, 2022)), and execute_python 

for running generated code. If the code execution fails, the model receives the error message and may revise its code. We allow up to five execution attempts per stage, after which the tool loop terminates and H YVE must conclude with the evidence gathered so far. Generated code runs in a sandboxed subprocess against a pre-loaded LM. The hypothesis generation and validation loop is capped at three iterations per component. If the budget is exhausted without a supported hypothesis, H YVE proceeds to the next component and retains its most recent hypothesis as a tentative explanation. We provide the reproducible prompts for H YVE in Appendix A and trace H YVE’s full trajectory for the running example in Appendix D. 

5 Experiments 

We evaluate four frontier LLMs as agent back-bones: GPT-5.4, Claude-Sonnet-4.6, Gemini-3.1-Pro, and Qwen-3-Coder-30B-A3B-Instruct. Ta-ble 2 reports their results on A GENTIC INTERP -BENCH .

HYVE provides meaningful circuit explana-tions, but no backbone dominates. Table 2 shows that H YVE provides useful component- and task-level explanations, with different strengths across backbones. Claude-Sonnet-4.6 is strongest on component tagging and code execution, reach-ing 0.79 Acc tag and 0.93 Sexec . Gemini-3.1 Pro gives the best judged explanations, with the high-est Qdesc and Acc task ; its task accuracy is 8 points higher than the second-best backbone. GPT-5.4 remains competitive on tag prediction, but its low code execution success appears to limit its final ex-planation quality. Qwen-3-Coder trails the closed-weight models on the final explanation metrics. 

Stronger LM backbones generate observation-grounded hypotheses. We further analyze whether H YVE’s hypotheses follow from its own observations. On the 10-task, 17-component subset used for human validation, we manually rate each 

observation-hypothesis pair for all four H YVE backbones on a 0–2 grounding scale (0: hypotheses contradicting or ignoring observations; 1: hypothe-ses partially supported by observations; 2: fully supported). We include annotation details in Ap-pendix E and show examples in Table 3. All proprietary models reveal high consistency between observations and hypotheses (average score of 1.94 with only one partially supported hypothesis and no ungrounded hypotheses). Qwen-3-Coder is lower, with a mean score of 1.41 and only 41 .2% fully grounded hypotheses. It often starts from a valid but generic observation, but then over-specifies the hypothesis by adding unsup-ported task-specific mechanisms, such as particular per-neuron roles or positional rules. 

GPT-5.4 produces the soundest validation plans. 

Given a grounded hypothesis, we ask whether HYVE proposes an experiment that actually tests it. We manually score validation-plan soundness 

on a 0-2 scale, ranging from no validation (0), indi-rect or incomplete validation (1), to full validation (2); example in Table 3. The score judges only whether the proposed experiment would meaning-fully support or refute the hypothesis, not whether the hypothesis itself is correct. Similar to Sec-6tion 3.3, we collect human ratings on the 10-task, 17-component subset and aggregate them as the lower of the two annotators’ scores. GPT-5.4 is strongest with a score of 1.71 , followed by Gemini-3.1 Pro ( 1.41 ), Claude-Sonnet-4.6 ( 1.24 ), and Qwen-3-Coder ( 0.71 ). We provide scoring de-tails and qualitative rubric examples in Appendix E. 

Reliable validation requires both sound plans and executable code. Sound validation plans are not sufficient unless they can be executed. GPT-5.4 has the strongest validation-plan ratings, but its low code execution success ( Sexec = 0 .52 ) limits how often those plans yield usable evidence. Claude-Sonnet-4.6 shows the opposite pattern ( Sexec =0.93 ), with reliable execution but weaker validation plans. Gemini-3.1 Pro is more balanced across the two dimensions, which helps explain its strong judged explanation scores. To understand execution failures, we cluster the failed execute_python calls into broad error cat-egories. Figure 3 shows that Python and tensor-manipulation bugs are common across backbones. Agents often make tensor shape mistakes, misuse helper or TransformerLens APIs, mishandle <BOS> 

offsets, or violate the tool protocol by omitting the required result variable. These patterns sug-gest that better execution scaffolding and more con-strained helper APIs could improve H YVE without changing the high-level reasoning loop. GPT-5.4   

> (n=314)
> Claude-4.6
> (n=101)
> Gemini-3.1
> (n=191)
> Qwen-3
> (n=301)
> 0
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100
> Share of execution errors (%)
> 51% 43%
> 63% 49%
> 15%
> 12%
> 13%
> 18%
> 22%
> 14%
> 14%
> 45%
> Tool protocol failures
> Runtime environment
> Lookup errors
> BOS/position offset
> Library/API misuse
> Python/tensor bugs

Figure 3: Distribution of execute_python errors by failure category and agent backbone. 

Explanations improve when hypotheses con-verge. We examine the convergence rate of HYVE backbones. This metric summarizes the 0 25 50 75 100 125 150    

> Components (out of 163)
> Claude-4.6
> Gemini-3.1
> GPT-5.4
> Qwen-3
> 106
> 103
> 81
> 65
> 32
> 25
> 26
> 20
> 8
> 5
> 18
> 21
> 17
> 30
> 38
> 57
> 1st Hyp. 2nd Hyp. 3rd Hyp. Unresolved

Figure 4: Hypothesis convergence per backbone. Each bar shows the share of 163 components supported on the 1st, 2nd, or 3rd hypothesis-generation iteration, or left unresolved after the three-iteration budget. 

downstream effect of the preceding failure modes: a grounded hypothesis must still be tested by a sound validation plan and executed successfully. Figure 4 shows that backbones with fewer unre-solved components tend to achieve stronger fi-nal explanations: Claude-Sonnet-4.6 converges most reliably and attains the best tag accuracy, while Qwen-3-Coder leaves many components un-resolved and performs worst. Despite producing the soundest validation plans, GPT-5.4 has the low-est convergence rate among the proprietary models, as many of its validation attempts fail at execution. Thus, a sound plan improves final explanations only when the agent can execute it and turn the result into usable evidence. This suggests that final explanation quality depends on completing the full 

observe, hypothesize, validate loop. We provide token usage and estimated API cost for running HYVE with each backbone in Appendix F. 

6 A Case Study on Realistic LM 

AGENTIC INTERP BENCH provides controlled ground truth by relying on semi-synthetic trans-formers, but these models do not capture the full setting of a naturally trained, large-scale autoregressive LM. To test whether HYVE’s behavior carries over to this setting, we conduct a case study on the All-for-One (AF1) circuit identified by Mamidanna et al. (2025) for the three-operand task A + B + C in Llama-3-8B (AI@Meta, 2024). Compared to A GENTIC IN-

> TERP

BENCH , this setting introduces additional challenges: (i) a larger localized circuit with more components, (ii) redundant routes between attention heads leading to backup heads, and (iii) components that appear important under logit lens 7Task Comp. (role) Observation Hypothesis loop                                     

> returns fraction of previous ‘x’ tokens L0_MLP (detect ‘x’ tokens)
> Obs: . . . L2 Norm of MLP outputs vary between ‘x’ and ‘non-x’ tokens . . .
> ✓H1: L0_MLP is a binary ‘is_x’ feature detector (H1 is fully grounded in Obs )example : (‘c’, ‘x’, ‘a’) →(0, 1/2, 1/3)
> ✓VP: Patch L0_MLP activations among ‘x’ and ‘non-x’ in both directions. Outputs shift as if the token’s is_x value flipped. (VP Tests all claims in H1 )
> Detects spam keywords. example :(‘Hi’, ‘offer’, ‘free’)
> →(‘not spam’, ‘spam’, ‘spam’) L0_MLP (detect each token from spam keywords & emit per position signal)
> Obs: . . . L0_MLP has a high, stable activation norms across positions, dominated by small set of neurons . . .
> ▲H1: Detects position-specific spam patterns by aggregating features from prev. tokens. ( H1 is partially-grounded in Obs. )
> ▲VP: Patch L0_MLP on spam positions , mean-ablate neuron 31, expect performance drops. ( VP ignores the
> aggregation claim in H1 )Multiply each element by the sequence length
> example : (2, 4, 6)
> →(6, 12, 18) L0_MLP (computes per position seq. length from aggregation)
> Obs: . . . L0_MLP has high activation norms, with position-dependent top neurons . . .
> ✗H1: L0_MLP applies a non-linear transformation to each token. ( H1 not grounded in Obs. )
> ✗VP: Mean ablate top 3 neurons, Test neuron 84 for causal effect ( VP does not verify any claims in H1 )

Table 3: Examples of hypothesis grounding and validation-plan soundness on benchmark tasks. Each row shows a task, an agent observation, the hypothesis ( H1 ), and the corresponding validation plan ( VP ). ( ✓) indicates grounded/sound, ( ▲) indicates partial cases, and ( ✗) indicates ungrounded/unsound. Pink marks the negative claims and Green marks the positive claims.             

> Agent Correct Partial Wrong GPT-5.4 631Claude-Sonnet-4.6 820Gemini-3.1-Pro 127

Table 4: Human-rated role-description quality on the 10-component AF1 circuit of Llama-3-8B. 

probes but are causally weak under intervention. The localized circuit contains 10 components, including operand-transfer attention heads, late layer MLPs, and logit-lens-positive attention heads. We manually construct component-level reference roles using targeted interventions, retaining both causal and redundant components to test whether HYVE can distinguish mechanistic evidence from suggestive but non-causal signals. We provide setup and reference-annotation details in Appendix G. We run H YVE with three LM backbones: GPT-5.4, Claude-Sonnet-4.6, and Gemini-3.1-Pro 3. We omit Qwen-3-Coder as it substantially underper-forms the closed-weight models on component descriptions and task inference in the controlled benchmark. Three human annotators indepen-dently rate the natural-language role note produced by each agent and we report a majority vote. 

> 3The AF1 paper was published after the reported training-data cutoffs of the proprietary backbones we use, reducing the likelihood of data leakage.

Table 4 shows the performance across these mod-els. Claude-Sonnet-4.6 and GPT-5.4 generally re-cover the transfer-head structure and distinguish causally redundant late components from neces-sary ones (Claude-Sonnet-4.6-H YVE iteration ex-ample in Appendix Table 12). The main failure mode is over-interpreting answer-correlated evi-dence: Gemini-3.1-Pro often treats positional or logit-lens signals as causal, leading to incorrect role descriptions. More broadly, this case study suggests a practical use for H YVE: applying it to already studied realistic circuits could test whether agentic explainers can reproduce known human findings and even surface certain overlooked mech-anisms. 

7 Conclusion and Future Work 

We study whether LM agents can explain localized circuits in transformers. To this end, we introduce a controlled benchmark and a new agentic circuit explanation framework. Our results show that LM agents can produce useful circuit explanations, but the problem is not solved. Stronger backbones usually generate grounded hypotheses. The harder step is validating them through sound causal tests and reliable code execution. This validation loop is where failures occur, especially through incomplete validation plans and code execution errors. Future work may expand A GENTIC INTERP -BENCH to larger and more naturally occurring cir-8cuits. Improving the validation loop is also impor-tant. In particular, richer helper libraries and more constrained execution interfaces could reduce code-level failures and make causal interventions easier for agents. More broadly, combining automated circuit discovery with agentic circuit explanation could enable end-to-end systems that both local-ize and explain mechanisms in language models. Finally, we will release our dataset and the agent framework, encouraging the MI community to con-tribute with more MI tool implementations and framework designs. 

Limitations 

This work evaluates circuit explanation in a post-localization setting. H YVE is given the localized circuit and asked to explain its components. Thus, our results measure the explanation stage rather than end-to-end circuit discovery. AGENTIC INTERP BENCH uses semi-synthetic circuits with recoverable ground truth. This enables systematic evaluation, but the circuits are smaller, more structured, and more algorithmic than many mechanisms in naturally trained LMs. Our real-model case study provides an initial test beyond this setting, and it can be extended, though future researchers should be careful about potential data leakage, i.e., the existing circuit findings may have been memorized by current LMs, which invalidates the benchmarking. The results reflect one agent design, prompting setup, and a helper library for code execution. Fu-ture systems may instantiate the same framework with richer tools or alternative interaction designs. 

Acknowledgments 

We appreciate the sponsorship from Foresight Institute. This project was also supported by resources provided by the Office of Research Computing at George Mason University (URL: https://orc.gmu.edu) and funded in part by grants from the National Science Foundation (Award Number 2018631). 

References 

AI@Meta. 2024. Llama 3 model card. Anthropic. 2026. Claude sonnet 4.6 system card. https://www-cdn.anthropic.com/ 78073f739564e986ff3e28522761a7a0b4484f84. pdf . Accessed: 2026-05-22. Xiaoyan Bai, Alexander Baumgartner, Haojia Sun, Ari Holtzman, and Chenhao Tan. 2026. The story is not the science: Execution-grounded evaluation of mechanistic interpretability research. Preprint ,arXiv:2602.18458. Leonard Bereska and Efstratios Gavves. 2024. Mech-anistic interpretability for ai safety–a review. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.14082 .Ziru Chen, Shijie Chen, Yuting Ning, Qianheng Zhang, Boshi Wang, Botao Yu, Yifei Li, Zeyi Liao, Chen Wei, Zitong Lu, Vishal Dey, Mingyi Xue, Frazier N. Baker, Benjamin Burns, Daniel Adu-Ampratwum, Xuhui Huang, Xia Ning, Song Gao, Yu Su, and Huan Sun. 2025. Scienceagentbench: Toward rigorous as-sessment of language agents for data-driven scientific discovery. In The Thirteenth International Confer-ence on Learning Representations .Arthur Conmy, Augustine Mavor-Parker, Aengus Lynch, Stefan Heimersheim, and Adrià Garriga-Alonso. 2023. Towards automated circuit discovery for mech-anistic interpretability. Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems , 36:16318–16352. Javier Ferrando, Gabriele Sarti, Arianna Bisazza, and Marta R. Costa-jussà. 2024. A primer on the in-ner workings of transformer-based language models. 

Preprint , arXiv:2405.00208. Atticus Geiger, Zhengxuan Wu, Hanson Lu, Josh Rozner, Elisa Kreiss, Thomas Icard, Noah Goodman, and Christopher Potts. 2022. Inducing causal struc-ture for interpretable neural networks. In Proceed-ings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 7324–7338. PMLR. Google DeepMind. 2026. Gemini 3.1 pro model card. https://storage.googleapis. com/deepmind-media/Model-Cards/ Gemini-3-1-Pro-Model-Card.pdf . Accessed: 2026-05-22. Rohan Gupta, Iván Arcuschin, Thomas Kwa, and Adrià Garriga-Alonso. 2025. Interpbench: Semi-synthetic transformers for evaluating mechanistic interpretabil-ity techniques. Preprint , arXiv:2407.14494. Jiaojiao Han, Wujiang Xu, Mingyu Jin, and Meng-nan Du. 2026. Sage: An agentic explainer frame-work for interpreting sae features in language models. 

Preprint , arXiv:2511.20820. Michael Hanna, Ollie Liu, and Alexandre Variengien. 2023. How does gpt-2 compute greater-than?: In-terpreting mathematical abilities in a pre-trained lan-guage model. Preprint , arXiv:2305.00586. Michael Hanna, Sandro Pezzelle, and Yonatan Be-linkov. 2024. Have faith in faithfulness: Going be-yond circuit overlap when finding model mechanisms. 

Preprint , arXiv:2403.17806. 

9Subhash Kantamneni and Max Tegmark. 2025. Lan-guage models use trigonometry to do addition. 

Preprint , arXiv:2502.00873. J. Richard Landis and Gary G. Koch. 1977. The mea-surement of observer agreement for categorical data. 

Biometrics , 33(1):159–174. LangChain AI. 2024. Langgraph. https://github. com/langchain-ai/langgraph .David Lindner, János Kramár, Matthew Rahtz, Thomas McGrath, and Vladimir Mikulik. 2023. Tracr: Com-piled transformers as a laboratory for interpretability. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.05062 .Weiqi Liu, Yongliang Miao, Haiyan Zhao, Yan-guang Liu, and Mengnan Du. 2026. Neuron-scope: A multi-agent framework for explaining pol-ysemantic neurons in language models. Preprint ,arXiv:2601.03671. Chris Lu, Cong Lu, Robert Tjarko Lange, Jakob Foer-ster, Jeff Clune, and David Ha. 2024. The ai scientist: Towards fully automated open-ended scientific dis-covery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06292 .Siddarth Mamidanna, Daking Rai, Ziyu Yao, and Yilun Zhou. 2025. All for one: LLMs solve mental math at the last token with information transferred from other tokens. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 30747–30760, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Arnau Marin-Llobet and Javier Ferrando. 2026. Automated interpretability and feature discovery in language models with agents. Preprint ,arXiv:2605.01555. Aaron Mueller, Atticus Geiger, Sarah Wiegreffe, Dana Arad, Iván Arcuschin, Adam Belfki, Yik Siu Chan, Jaden Fiotto-Kaufman, Tal Haklay, Michael Hanna, and 1 others. 2025. Mib: A mechanistic interpretabil-ity benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.13151 .Neel Nanda and Joseph Bloom. 2022. Transformerlens. 

https://github.com/TransformerLensOrg/ TransformerLens .OpenAI. 2026. Introducing gpt-5.4. https://openai. com/index/introducing-gpt-5-4/ . Accessed: 2026-05-22. Arjun Panickssery, Samuel R. Bowman, and Shi Feng. 2024. Llm evaluators recognize and favor their own generations. Preprint , arXiv:2404.13076. Gonçalo Paulo, Alex Mallen, Caden Juang, and Nora Belrose. 2024. Automatically Interpreting Millions of Features in Large Language Models. arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2410.13928. Qwen. 2025. Qwen3 technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2505.09388. Daking Rai, Yilun Zhou, Shi Feng, Abulhair Saparov, and Ziyu Yao. 2024. A practical review of mecha-nistic interpretability for transformer-based language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.02646 .Sarah Schwettmann, Tamar Rott Shaham, Joanna Materzynska, Neil Chowdhury, Shuang Li, Jacob Andreas, David Bau, and Antonio Torralba. 2023. FIND: A Function Description Benchmark for Eval-uating Interpretability Methods. arXiv e-prints ,arXiv:2309.03886. Aaquib Syed, Can Rager, and Arthur Conmy. 2024. Attribution patching outperforms automated circuit discovery. In Proceedings of the 7th BlackboxNLP Workshop: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Net-works for NLP , pages 407–416. Hannes Thurnherr and Jérémy Scheurer. 2024. Tracr-bench: Generating interpretability testbeds with large language models. Preprint , arXiv:2409.13714. Kevin Ro Wang, Alexandre Variengien, Arthur Conmy, Buck Shlegeris, and Jacob Steinhardt. 2023. Inter-pretability in the wild: a circuit for indirect object identification in GPT-2 small. In The Eleventh Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations .Gail Weiss, Yoav Goldberg, and Eran Yahav. 2021. Thinking like transformers. Preprint ,arXiv:2106.06981. Yutaro Yamada, Robert Tjarko Lange, Cong Lu, Shen-gran Hu, Chris Lu, Jakob Foerster, Jeff Clune, and David Ha. 2025. The ai scientist-v2: Workshop-level automated scientific discovery via agentic tree search. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.08066 .

10 A Prompt Templates 

In this section, we include the templates used to prompt H YVE. 

A.1 System Prompt 

System Prompt 

You are a research agent specializing in mechanistic in-terpretability of transformer language models. Your goal is to explain how a localized circuit, and in particular each target component, contributes to the model’s behav-ior on a given sequence-processing task. 

Context: 

1. Task: The model performs a sequence-processing task. See the Task Information below for input-output examples. 2. Target model: A decoder-only transformer with {NUM_LAYERS} layers, {NUM_HEADS} atten-tion heads per layer, and an MLP sublayer in each block. 3. Localized components: {ALL_COMPONENTS} 

4. Target component: {COMPONENT_IDENTIFIER} 

5. Component Localization: The listed components have been identified as causally relevant to the task. Your goal is to explain the functional role of the target component within this circuit. 6. Previously validated components: 

{VALIDATED} .7. Iterative Workflow :(a) Observation: Gather descriptive evidence about the behavior and activation patterns of COMPONENT_IDENTIFIER using the avail-able analysis tools. (b) Hypothesis Generation: Propose a hy-pothesis about the functional role of 

COMPONENT_IDENTIFIER , grounded in your observations. (c) Hypothesis Validation: Design and exe-cute causal or behavioral tests to support or refute the hypothesis. (d) Classification: After all components are validated, assign each a functional role tag from a fixed taxonomy and a concise func-tional role note, grounded in its validated hypothesis. (e) Summarization: Once all components are classified, synthesize how the information flows through the localized circuit. Write a description of the task being performed by the model. 

Guidelines. Do not assume the role of any component in advance. Prefer precise, falsifiable hypotheses. Ground claims in mechanistic evidence from activations, inter-ventions, and model behavior. 

A.2 Observation Stage 

Observation Plan Prompt 

You are currently in the Observation stage, Plan Gen-eration step. Your goal is to gather descriptive evidence about COMPONENT_IDENTIFIER that will guide hypothe-sis generation in the next stage. Generate a structured plan specifying what to observe about {COMPONENT_IDENTIFIER} . Follow these instruc-tions: 1. The plan must be purely descriptive and observa-tional. Do not include ablations or causal interven-tions. 2. Be concrete and implementable. After this step, Python code will be generated directly from this plan. 3. Keep each field concise, using 1-3 sentences. Analysis tools are available in the execution environment and will be discovered during code execution. Respond with a JSON object containing exactly the following fields, and do not include any text outside the JSON: • stage : "OBSERVATION PLAN for {COMPONENT_IDENTIFIER}" 

• goal : what aspect of the component should be characterized, and why it is relevant. • procedure : a short list of concrete observation steps. • inputs : the model tensors, hooks, or cached acti-vations required. • expected_result : the expected pattern or value and how it should be interpreted. 

Observation Code and Execution Prompt 

You are currently in the Observation stage, Code Gen-eration and Execution step. 

Observation plan: OBSERVATION_PLAN 

You have access to three tools: • list_directory(path) : list files in a directory on the analysis server. • read_file(path) : read the full contents of a file on the analysis server. • execute_python(code) : execute Python code in the pre-configured execution environment. The execution environment has the following objects in scope: • model : a HookedTransformer .• tokenize(sequences) : converts a list of token lists into a [batch, seq_len] tensor. Each se-quence starts with BOS and uses tokens from the task vocabulary. • decode(logits) : converts model output logits to task-semantic values in the same format as the task examples. The BOS position is excluded by default. • Standard imports Recommended steps: 

11 1. Call list_directory() to discover available helper files. 2. Read the file most relevant to the observation plan to learn the available function signatures. 3. Generate executable Python code for the observa-tion and call execute_python . The code must implement the observation plan, assign all outputs to a dictionary named result .Each execute_python call runs in a fresh subprocess. Variables, imports, and state do not persist across calls. Every call must be self-contained. Do not perform causal interventions. You have up to {MAX_EXECUTE_ROUNDS} 

execution attempts. If code returns an error, read the traceback, identify the root cause, and revise the next attempt. When sufficient evidence has been gathered to charac-terize {COMPONENT_IDENTIFIER} , respond with a JSON object containing exactly one field: • observation : a concise natural-language description of what was observed about 

{COMPONENT_IDENTIFIER} .

A.3 Hypothesis Generation Stage 

Hypothesis Generation Prompt 

You are currently in the Hypothesis Generation stage. Based on the observation collected in the previous stage (if available) and the task context provided in the system prompt, your goal is to propose a pre-cise, falsifiable hypothesis about the functional role of 

{COMPONENT_IDENTIFIER} in the circuit. 

Prior observation: {OBSERVATION} 

Previously refuted hypotheses (if any): {REFUTED} 

Instructions: 

1. Your hypothesis must be grounded in the prior observation. Do not contradict observed evidence. 2. If previous hypotheses were refuted, explicitly ad-dress why they failed and constrain the new pro-posal accordingly. 3. A good hypothesis specifies: (a) what the compo-nent computes, (b) which input positions or tokens it operates on, and (c) what it contributes down-stream. 4. Use language that reflects a testable claim, such as “we hypothesize that . . . ” Respond with a JSON object containing exactly the fol-lowing fields, and do not include any text outside the JSON: • hypothesis : the proposed hypothesis about the functional role of {COMPONENT_IDENTIFIER} .• reasoning : 1-3 sentences explaining why the hy-pothesis is consistent with the observation. 

A.4 Hypothesis Validation Stage 

Validation Plan Prompt 

You are currently in the Hypothesis Validation stage. Your goal is to design and execute a causal experiment that produces evidence either supporting or refuting the current hypothesis about {COMPONENT_IDENTIFIER} .The outcome will determine whether this component’s role is considered explained, or whether hypothesis gen-eration restarts with revised constraints. 

Current hypothesis: {CURRENT_HYPOTHESIS} 

Prior observation: {OBSERVATION} 

Requirement: Design a causal experiment to test the hypothesis. Follow these instructions: 1. The experiment must be causal or interventional. Appropriate methods include activation patching, mean ablation, interchange intervention etc. 2. The plan must be directly motivated by the hypoth-esis. The expected result should follow logically from what the hypothesis predicts. 3. Be concrete and implementable. In the next step, Python code will be generated directly from this plan. 4. Keep each field concise, using 1-3 sentences. Respond with a JSON object containing exactly the fol-lowing fields, and do not include any text outside the JSON: • stage : "VALIDATION PLAN for COMPONENT_IDENTIFIER" 

• goal : the specific prediction of the hypothesis being tested. • procedure : a short list of concrete experimental steps. • inputs : the model tensors, hooks, or cached acti-vations required. • expected_result : what should appear in the re-sults if the hypothesis is correct. 

Validation Code and Execution Prompt 

You are currently in the Hypothesis Validation stage, 

Code Generation and Execution step. 

Current hypothesis: {CURRENT_HYPOTHESIS} 

Validation plan: {VALIDATION_PLAN} 

You have access to three tools: • list_directory(path) : list files in a directory on the analysis server. • read_file(path) : read the full contents of a file on the analysis server. • execute_python(code) : execute Python code in the pre-configured analysis environment. The execution environment has the following objects in scope: • model : a HookedTransformer .• tokenize(sequences) : converts a list of token lists into a [batch, seq_len] tensor. Each se-quence starts with BOS and uses tokens from the task vocabulary. • decode(logits) : converts model output logits to task-semantic values in the same format as the 

12 task examples. The BOS position is excluded by default. • Standard imports. Recommended steps: 1. Call list_directory() to discover available helper files with template code. 2. Read the file most relevant to the validation task to learn the available causal-intervention function signatures. Helper functions are already defined in the execution environment and should be called directly, without import statements. 3. Generate executable Python code for validating the hypothesis and call execute_python . The code must implement the validation plan, assign all outputs to a dictionary named result .Each execute_python call runs in a fresh subprocess; variables, imports, and state do not persist across calls. Every call must be self-contained. The experiment must include at least one causal intervention, such as ablation, activation patching, or interchange intervention. If a met-ric function is used, it should have signature fn(logits: Tensor) -> float , evaluate all output-bearing posi-tions, exclude BOS, and use decode() to convert logits to task values. You have up to {MAX_EXECUTE_ROUNDS} 

execution attempts. If code returns an error, read the traceback, identify the root cause, and revise the next attempt. 

Decision criteria: 

• support : the results are consistent with the hy-pothesis, and the intervention effect aligns with the prediction. • refute : the results contradict the hypothesis, or the effect is absent, reversed, or inconsistent. If the result is ambiguous, prefer refute .When sufficient experimental evidence has been gath-ered, respond with a JSON object containing the fol-lowing fields, and do not include any text outside the JSON: • decision : exactly support or refute .• explanation : 2–3 sentences summarizing the ob-served tool results and why they support the deci-sion. • ruling_out : required only for refute ; specifies what claim in the hypothesis is contradicted. 

A.5 Classification Stage 

Taxonomy Classification Prompt 

You are now in the Taxonomy Classification stage. All components have been analyzed. Assign each circuit component a functional role tag from the taxonomy be-low, based on its validated hypothesis. 

Taxonomy: 

• INDICATOR : Detects a property of a single input and emits a binary or predicate-like signal. • AGGREGATOR : Reduces content across multiple po-sitions into a summary quantity, such as a count, fraction, or accumulated value. The information 

is collapsed after the operation. • ROUTER : Moves content from one position to an-other through positional or index-based selection. Content is copied across positions. • MAPPER : Transforms a single input at each posi-tion independently into a non-binary output, such as an arithmetic value, remapping, lookup, or re-shaped representation, including when the result is a control signal. • COMBINER : Reads two or more distinct upstream signals or inputs and fuses them into one output. 

Validated hypotheses: {VALIDATED_HYPOTHESES} 

Instructions: 

1. Assign exactly one tag to each component based on the validated hypothesis and the taxonomy def-initions. 2. When tags overlap, choose based on the compo-nent’s functional input-output behavior. 3. Write a concise one-sentence description of what the component does in the context of this specific task. 4. Ground the description in the hypothesis, not in the generic taxonomy definition. 5. Do not output anything outside the JSON. Respond with a JSON object containing one entry for each component. Each entry should contain exactly two fields: • tag : one of INDICATOR , AGGREGATOR , ROUTER ,

MAPPER , or COMBINER .• description : a one-sentence task-specific role description. 

A.6 Summarization Stage 

Circuit Summarization Prompt 

You are in the Circuit Summarization stage. All com-ponents have been validated and classified. 

Localized components: {LOCALIZED} 

Classified component roles: {ROLES} 

Validated hypotheses: {VALIDATED_HYPOTHESES} 

Instructions: 

1. Synthesize a coherent account of how information flows through the localized circuit and what task is being implemented. 2. Describe the computational stages and the explicit interactions between components. 3. Infer the underlying task using both the input-output examples and the validated component mechanisms. If the mechanisms conflict with the examples, prioritize the examples. 4. Before finalizing the derived task description, check it against at least two input-output examples at non-boundary positions and revise if needed. Do not include these checks in the final output. 5. Write the derived task description as a concise task specification. Do not copy example values, or restate component-level operations. Respond with a valid JSON object containing the fol-lowing fields, and do not include any text outside the JSON: 

13 • information_flow : 1-2 sentences describing the sequential dependencies among components. • derived_task_description : 1-2 sentences stat-ing the sequential task performed by the model. 

B Component Role Taxonomy 

Table 5 contains details regarding the 5-class role taxonomy. 

C Annotation Example: frac_prevs 

This section illustrates how we derive component-level annotations from InterpBench using the 

frac_prevs task as an example. The goal of 

frac_prevs is to return, at each position, the fraction of previous tokens up to and including that position that are equal to ‘x’ . Our annotation procedure uses two sources of information: the original RASP program, which specifies the high-level algorithm, and the high-level/low-level correspondence map, which identifies which trained InterpBench component implements each Tracr component. The RASP program for this task is: 

is_x = (rasp.tokens == "x").named("is_x") bools = rasp.numerical(is_x) prevs = rasp.Select(rasp.indices, rasp.indices, rasp.Comparison.LEQ) return rasp.numerical( rasp.Aggregate(prevs, bools, default=0) ).named("frac_prevs") 

This program decomposes the task into two main steps. First, is_x computes a per-position predicate indicating whether the current token is x. The vari-able bools converts this predicate into a numerical signal. Second, prevs defines a prefix selector over positions, and Aggregate(prevs, bools) aggre-gates the is_x signal over the prefix to compute the running fraction. Thus, is_x corresponds to an indicator-style computation, while frac_prevs 

corresponds to an aggregation over previous posi-tions. InterpBench provides a high-level/low-level cor-respondence map that links each Tracr high-level node to the trained low-level InterpBench compo-nent aligned with it. For frac_prevs , the relevant entries are: 

{TracrHLNode( name: blocks.0.mlp.hook_post, label: is_x_3, index: [:] ) : { LLNode( name= 'blocks.0.mlp.hook_post ',index=[:]) }, TracrHLNode( name: blocks.1.attn.hook_result, label: frac_prevs_1, index: [:, :, 0, :] ) : {LLNode( name= 'blocks.1.attn.hook_result ',index=[:, :, 2, :])}} is_x_3 | HL = blocks.0.mlp.hook_post, index = [:] -> LL = [( 'blocks.0.mlp.hook_post ', [:])] frac_prevs_1 | HL = blocks.1.attn...,index=[:,:,0,:] -> LL = [( 'blocks.1.attn... ',[:,:,2,:])] 

The first correspondence entry maps the Tracr MLP component labeled is_x_3 to the trained In-terpBench component blocks.0.mlp.hook_post .Since the corresponding RASP variable is_x de-tects whether each token is x, we annotate this com-ponent as an I NDICATOR . Its role note is: “Com-putes a per-position feature indicating whether the token at that position is x or not.” The second correspondence entry maps the Tracr attention output labeled frac_prevs_1 to head 2 of blocks.1.attn.hook_result in the trained InterpBench model. Since this component im-plements the aggregation over the prefix selector 

prevs , we annotate it as an A GGREGATOR . Its role note is: “Aggregates prefix fraction by attending over previous positions.” We also record that this component uses the upstream is_x feature com-puted by L0_MLP. The resulting component annotations are there-fore: 

components = [ {"id": "L0_MLP", "hook": "blocks.0.mlp.hook_post", "role": { "tag": "INDICATOR", "note": "Computes per-position feature indicating whether the token at that 

14 Tag Type RASP primitive Description INDICATOR MLP rasp.Map(pred, tokens) Detects a property of the current token and emits a binary signal.            

> AGGREGATOR ATTN rasp.Aggregate() ,
> rasp.SelectorWidth()
> Computes a summary over selected positions (e.g. count, fraction, accumulated quantity).
> ROUTER ATTN rasp.Select(rasp.indices, . . . ) +rasp.Aggregate()
> Moves a token from one position to another via positional or index-based selection.
> MAPPER MLP rasp.Map() Applies an element-wise transformation to each position.
> COMBINER MLP rasp.SequenceMap() ,
> rasp.LinearSequenceMap()
> Reads and combines multiple upstream signals into one output through an arithmetic or logical operation.

Table 5: Taxonomy of functional roles used in component-level annotations. Each tag captures the abstract computational role played by an attention head or MLP within a localized circuit, grounded in the corresponding RASP primitive. 

position is 'x' or not." }, "labels": ["is_x_3"], }, {"id": "L1H2_ATTN", "hook": "blocks.1.attn.hook_result[2]", "role": { "tag": "AGGREGATOR", "note": "Aggregates prefix fraction by attending over previous positions." }, "labels": ["frac_prevs_1"], }]

This example shows how A GENTIC INTERP -BENCH extends InterpBench: InterpBench pro-vides the trained low-level models and their cor-respondence to Tracr components, while A GEN -

> TIC

INTERP BENCH adds semantic role annotations by tracing each localized component back to the RASP variable it implements. 

D HYVE Walkthrough 

To make the pipeline concrete, we trace H YVE’s full trajectory on component L0_MLP for the run-ning example frac_prevs , using Claude-Sonnet-4.6 as the backbone. 

Observation. The observation plan is to char-acterize what L0_MLP encodes, write code to cache its outputs across token types ( ‘x’ , ‘c’ ,

‘a’ , ‘b’ ), and compare per-token-type difference vectors. H YVE observes that L0_MLP produces dramatically different outputs for ‘x’ vs non-‘x’ 

tokens ( ∥∆∥ ≈ 2.65 ), while non-‘x’ tokens are similar to each other ( ∥∆∥ ≈ 0.04 -0.07 ). 

Hypothesis. “L0_MLP is a binary is_x feature detector: at every position, it writes a position-invariant signal into the residual stream encoding whether the token is ‘x’ (positive) or not (near-zero/negative)” 

Validation. HYVE designs an activation-patching experiment: replace the L0_MLP output for an ‘x’ token with the output for a non-‘x’ 

token (and reverse). Patching confirms causal necessity, with normalized effect ≈ 0.97 for x → c

and ≈ 0.99 on the reverse patch. 

Classification. HYVE assigns the tag I NDICA -

> TOR

, matching the ground-truth annotation. It also writes a role description ( “At each token posi-tion, L0_MLP detects whether the token is ‘x’ and writes a consistent binary feature into the residual stream” ) which closely matches the ground-truth note ( “Computes per-position feature indicating whether the token at that position is ‘x’.” ). 

Summarization. Based on the validated hypothe-ses and the assigned component tags, H YVE de-fines the underlying task as: “Given a sequence of tokens, the model outputs at each position the proportion of tokens seen so far (excluding <BOS> )that are equal to ‘x’, producing a running fraction that updates with each new token.” 

E Evaluation Details and Human Annotation 

E.1 Overview 

Section 3.3 defines the main evaluation metrics. Here, we provide additional details about the hu-man annotation protocol, agreement computation, process-level metrics, and qualitative rubric ex-amples. The human evaluation covers two final-output metrics, role description quality ( Qdesc ) and 15 derived task accuracy ( Acc task ), and two process-level metrics, validation-plan soundness ( Sval ) and hypothesis grounding. The human evaluation was conducted in two stages. We first annotated outputs from the two backbones used in our initial analysis, GPT-5.4 and Claude-Sonnet-4.6. This larger GPT/Claude anno-tation set is used to report (i) the inter-annotator agreement and (ii) the agreement between human annotators and LLM judges in Table 6. It contains 

n = 110 component-level instances for Qdesc and 

Sval , and n = 62 task-level instances for Acc task .After extending H YVE to two additional back-bones, Gemini-3.1-Pro and Qwen-3-Coder-30B-A3B-Instruct, we performed a second annotation pass on a smaller shared subset covering all four backbones . This cross-backbone subset con-tains 10 tasks and 17 components, yielding 68 component-level instances and 40 task-level in-stances. This subset supports the human-validation results and process-level comparisons discussed in the main text. 

E.2 Annotation Protocol 

For Qdesc , Acc task , and Sval , the annotation was performed by two human annotators, both CS grad-uate students with machine-learning experience. The annotators were given a standardized anno-tation README, detailed metric definitions, and representative examples for each score level. The instructions followed the same rubrics used for the LLM-judge evaluation. Annotators worked independently using aStreamlit-based interface. To reduce bias, model identities were hidden and randomized. The inter-face displayed model outputs using anonymized labels such as Agent A and Agent B; these labels were only interface labels and did not correspond to fixed backbone names. In the initial annotation stage, the interface showed outputs from GPT-5.4 and Claude-Sonnet-4.6. In the later cross-backbone annotation stage, the same blinding and randomiza-tion procedure was applied to outputs from all four backbones. For each task, annotators first saw the task con-text, including the ground-truth task summary, up to five input-output examples, and the list of local-ized components with their ground-truth tags. For each localized component, annotators then saw the agent’s hypothesis and validation plan as read-only context and rated validation-plan soundness ( Sval )as Sound , Partial , or Unsound . A Sound plan di-rectly tests the key mechanistic prediction of the hypothesis; a Partial plan is causally relevant but indirect or incomplete; and an Unsound plan does not meaningfully test the hypothesis. Annotators next saw the ground-truth tag and role note for the component, followed by the agent’s predicted role description. The predicted tag was shown only as context and was not itself rated. Annotators rated role description quality (Qdesc ) as Correct , Partial , or Wrong . A Correct 

description captures the component’s task-specific role; a Partial description captures the main role but is vague, incomplete, or contains an incorrect mechanistic sub-claim; and a Wrong description contradicts the reference role or describes a differ-ent function. Finally, for each task, annotators saw the ground-truth task summary and each agent’s derived task description. They rated task accuracy ( Acc task )as Correct or Wrong , indicating whether the de-rived description recovered the task-level behavior. Annotators could optionally provide a short ratio-nale for each rating. The hidden mapping from anonymized agent labels to the underlying H YVE backbone was recorded automatically for analysis but was not visible during annotation. 

E.3 Human Inter-Annotator Agreement Computation 

For ordinal 3-point metrics ( Qdesc and Sval ), we report linearly weighted Cohen’s κ. Linear weight-ing is appropriate because adjacent disagreements, such as 1 vs. 2, are less severe than endpoint dis-agreements, such as 0 vs. 2. For binary Acc task ,we report ordinary Cohen’s κ without weighting. Table 6 reports inter-annotator agreement on the larger GPT/Claude annotation subset. Agreement is almost perfect for the final-output metrics, with 

κ = 0.8 for Qdesc and κ = 0.96 for Acc task .Agreement is moderate for Sval (κ = 0 .46 ), re-flecting the greater subjectivity of judging whether a proposed causal experiment fully tests a mecha-nistic hypothesis. To rule out this subjectivity, we consider the lower score between the two annota-tors as the ground truth, implementing a stricter evaluation standard for LM agents. This applies to all human evaluations. 

E.4 Human-LLM Judge Agreement Computation 

We employ two LLM judges in our work. Similar to how we aggregate the annotated labels from the 16 two annotators, we use conservative lower-score aggregation between the two LLM judges as well. That is, when we apply the LLM judges, we con-sider the lower score between them as the judg-ing score for an agent. This aggregation retains a high score only when both annotators or both LLM judges assign it, reducing the chance of over-crediting an incomplete or incorrect explanation. We report the human-LLM judge agreement in Ta-ble 6, the bottom panel, where lower human label is the lower of the two human annotator scores, and the lower judge label is the lower of the two LLM-judge scores. Table 6 shows that the agreement               

> Metric nκ
> Human–human agreement
> Qdesc 110 0.802
> Sval 110 0.460
> Acc task 62 0.963
> Lower human vs. Lower judge agreement
> Qdesc 110 0.753
> Sval 110 0.481
> Acc task 62 0.864

Table 6: Human–human inter-annotator agreement and Human–LLM-judge agreement on the larger GPT/-Claude annotation subset. The value of n counts model-output instances, κ denotes linearly weighted Cohen’s 

κ for ordinal metrics. 

is substantial for Qdesc (κ = 0 .75 ) and almost perfect for Acc task (κ = 0 .86 ), supporting the use of LLM judges for the final-output metrics. In con-trast, agreement is lower for Sval (κ = 0 .48 ). To-gether with the lower human-human agreement for 

Sval , this suggests that validation-plan soundness is useful as a process-level diagnostic in qualita-tive analysis but less reliable as an LLM-judged headline metric. We therefore opt not to use it as an official metric for A GENTIC INTERP BENCH 

and leave more reliable automatic evaluation of validation-plan quality to future work. 

E.5 Cross-Backbone Human Validation Subset 

We also evaluate a smaller subset covering all four H YVE backbones. This subset contains 10 tasks and 17 localized components, yielding 68 component-level instances for Qdesc and Sval , and 40 task-level instances for Acc task . Table 7 re-ports the corresponding agreement results on the cross-backbone subset covering all four H YVE backbones. The final output metrics show high human–human and human–LLM agreement, while 

Sval remains lower, supporting our decision to treat it as a process-level metric.               

> Metric nκ
> Human–human agreement
> Qdesc 68 0.83
> Sval 68 0.37
> Acc task 40 0.96
> Lower human vs. Lower judge agreement
> Qdesc 68 0.76
> Sval 68 0.44
> Acc task 40 0.80

Table 7: Human–human inter-annotator agreement and Human–LLM-judge agreement on the cross-backbone human-validation subset covering all four H YVE back-bones. The value of n counts model-output instances, κ

denotes linearly weighted Cohen’s κ for ordinal metrics. 

For completeness, Table 8 reports pairwise agree-ment between each human annotator and each LLM judge on the cross-backbone subset. Agreement varies across individual judge pairs, especially for 

Sval , but remains higher for the two final-output metrics.                 

> Metric H1-GPT H1-Gemini H2-GPT H2-Gemini
> Qdesc 0.73 0.78 0.63 0.74
> Sval 0.23 0.59 0.43 0.49
> Acc task 0.73 0.74 0.73 0.74

Table 8: Linear-weighted Cohen’s κ between each LLM judge and each human annotator (H1, H2) on the cross-backbone subset (n = 68 for Qdesc /S val , n = 40 for 

Acc task ). 

E.6 Process-Level Diagnostics 

In addition to the final-output metrics, we analyze two process-level diagnostics: hypothesis ground-ing and validation-plan soundness. These diagnos-tics help identify where the agent succeeds or fails inside the observe-hypothesize-validate loop. 

E.6.1 Hypothesis Grounding 

We annotate hypothesis grounding on the same 10-task, 17-component cross-backbone subset used for the main-text human validation. This annotation was performed by one author of the paper for anal-ysis purposes. For each H YVE backbone and each component, the annotator was shown the natural-language observation produced by the agent, the subsequent hypothesis generated from that obser-vation, and the task context, including the task de-17 scription, input-output examples, and ground-truth component roles. The annotator judged whether the hypothesis was supported by the observation on a 3-point scale: 0 if the hypothesis contradicted or ignored the observation, 1 if it was partially sup-ported but added unsupported details, and 2 if it was fully supported by the observation. Table 9 summarizes the grounding scores. The proprietary backbones produce mostly observation-grounded hypotheses, while Qwen-3-Coder more often adds unsupported task-specific details beyond its observations.                

> Backbone Mean Fully grounded Partial GPT-5.4 1.94 94.1% 5.9% Claude-Sonnet-4.6 1.94 94.1% 5.9% Gemini-3.1-Pro 1.94 94.1% 5.9% Qwen-3-Coder-30B 1.41 41.2% 58.8%
> Table 9: Human-evaluated hypothesis-grounding results on the 10-task, 17-component cross-backbone subset. The score measures whether the agent’s hypothesis is supported by its own observation (scale: 0-2).

E.6.2 Validation-Plan Soundness 

Validation-plan soundness ( Sval ) measures whether a proposed validation experiment directly tests the current hypothesis. A sound plan should specify an intervention whose expected result follows from the hypothesis and whose outcome could meaning-fully support or refute it. We report LLM-judged 

Sval in Table 10 as a process-level diagnostic for analyzing validation behavior. However, as shown in Tables 6, 7, and 8, Sval has lower human–human and human–LLM agreement than the final-output metrics. This suggests that validation-plan sound-ness is more subjective to evaluate than role de-scriptions or task descriptions. For this reason, the main text reports validation-plan soundness using human annotations on the cross-backbone subset. The LLM-judged scores in Table 10 are included only as an additional diagnostic. The LLM-judged scores show a broadly consistent backbone-level pattern. 

E.7 Qualitative Rubric Examples E.7.1 Role Description Quality 

We provide examples for the three Qdesc score lev-els. As described in Section 3.3, Qdesc evaluates whether the predicted role description matches the reference component role. We use a 3-point scale when prompting the LLM judge and later rescale it      

> Backbone Sval
> GPT-5.4 1.85 Claude-Sonnet-4.6 1.0 Gemini-3.1-Pro 1.13 Qwen-3-Coder-30B 0.76
> Table 10: LLM-judged validation-plan soundness for the four H YVE backbones. Scores are averaged over all validation plans using the conservative lower score assigned by the two LLM judges, GPT-5.4 and Gemini-3.1-Pro.

to [0 , 1] for ease of reporting. A score of 2 indicates a correct task-specific description, a score of 1 in-dicates a partially correct description with missing or incorrect mechanistic details, and a score of 0 indicates a wrong or contradictory description. 

Correct example (score 2): L0_MLP in 

frac_prevs 

• Reference tag: INDICATOR 

Reference note: Computes per-position fea-ture indicating whether the token at that posi-tion is ‘x’ or not. • Agent’s description: At each token position, L0_MLP detects whether the token is ‘x’ and writes a consistent binary feature vector into the residual stream encoding ‘is_x’ (positive) or ‘not-x’ (near-zero/negative). • Rationale: The description accurately cap-tures that L0_MLP computes a binary indica-tor of whether each token is ‘x’ and writing this to the residual stream. 

Partial example (score 1): L1H2 of frac_prevs 

• Reference tag: AGGREGATOR 

Reference note: Aggregates prefix fraction by attending over previous positions. • Agent’s description: At each position t,L1H2 reads the ‘is_x’ feature vectors from all prior positions, attends preferentially to ‘x’ positions, and collapses them into a single out-put vector encoding the running fraction of ‘x’ tokens seen so far (count _x/t ).• Rationale: The description correctly identi-fies L1H2 as aggregating information from previous positions to compute a running frac-tion of ‘x’ tokens. However, it incorrectly says the head attends preferentially to x po-sitions. The ground-truth attention pattern is 18 uniform over previous positions, not prefer-ential toward ‘x’ positions, and the fraction is computed by averaging the upstream ‘is_x’ values. 

Wrong example (score 0): L1H0 from an “extract-unique tokens” task. 

• Reference tag: AGGREGATOR 

Reference note: Aggregates matching posi-tions, defined by same token and earlier-or-equal index, into a per-position count of how many times each token has appeared up to and including the current position. • Agent’s description: L1H0 mainly routes residual content by preserving local state through self-attention on ‘c’ positions and otherwise sometimes pulling a weak, largely non-essential generic contextual write from a recent ‘c’-associated position. • Rationale: The description focuses on pre-serving local state and attending to ‘c’ posi-tions, which does not match the ground-truth role of aggregating same-token prefix posi-tions to compute occurrence counts. 

E.7.2 Hypothesis Grounding 

Hypothesis grounding evaluates whether H YVE’s hypothesis follows from its own observation. This score is separate from role-description correctness. A hypothesis can be grounded in the observation but still be wrong with respect to the reference role, or correct in outcome but unsupported by the evidence the agent cites. 

Fully grounded example (score 2). In the 

frac_prevs task, H YVE observes that the L2 norm of L0_MLP outputs varies between ‘x’ and non-‘x’ tokens. It then hypothesizes that L0_MLP is a binary ‘is_x’ feature detector. This receives a score of 2 because the hypothesis is directly supported by the observation. The observed activation difference is exactly the kind of evidence expected from a token-property indicator. 

Partially grounded example (score 1). In the spam-keyword detection task, H YVE observes that L0_MLP has high, stable activation norms across positions dominated by a small set of neurons. It then hypothesizes that the component detects position-specific spam patterns by aggregating fea-tures from previous tokens. This receives a score of 1. Although the observa-tion supports the broad claim that L0_MLP is im-portant and neuron-mediated, it does not support 

the more specific claims about position-specific behavior or aggregation over previous tokens. 

Ungrounded example (score 0). In the sequence-length multiplication task, H YVE observes that L0_MLP has high activation norms with position-dependent top neurons. It then hypothesizes that L0_MLP applies a non-linear transformation to each token. This receives a score of 0. The hypothesis 

does not follow from the observation: position-dependent activation strength does not provide evi-dence for a token-wise non-linear transformation. 

E.7.3 Validation-Plan Soundness 

Sval evaluates whether the agent’s proposed vali-dation experiment directly tests its stated hypoth-esis. The score does not judge whether the hy-pothesis itself is correct, nor whether the gener-ated code eventually executes successfully. Instead, it asks whether the proposed causal experiment would meaningfully support or refute the specific mechanistic claim made in the hypothesis. We use a 3-point scale: • Sound (2): The plan directly targets the key prediction in the hypothesis. The interven-tion cleanly distinguishes the hypothesis from nearby alternatives. • Partial (1): The plan is causally motivated and relevant, but it tests the hypothesis only in-directly, bundles multiple subclaims together, or leaves important alternatives unresolved. • Unsound (0): The plan does not test the stated hypothesis. For example, it may test a differ-ent claim, rely only on non-causal evidence, or propose an expected result that would actually refute the hypothesis. 

Partial example (score 1): L1H2 in frac_prevs .

• Task: The model computes the running frac-tion of x tokens seen so far. • Component: L1H2, whose reference role is to aggregate prefix information by attending over previous positions. • Agent hypothesis: L1H2 is a running-fraction aggregator. It reads upstream is_x 

19 features from L0_MLP, attends to prior posi-tions, and writes an output vector encoding the running fraction of x tokens. • Validation plan: Run the model on sequences with different running fractions, mean-ablate L1H2, and measure how the clean-minus-ablated output changes with the running frac-tion. The plan is relevant because it performs a causal intervention on L1H2. If ablating this head system-atically disrupts the running-fraction output, that would provide evidence that the head contributes to the task. Thus, the plan tests the general necessity of L1H2 for the running-fraction computation. However, the plan is incomplete because the hy-pothesis makes more specific mechanistic claims than simple necessity. It claims that L1H2 reads 

is_x features from previous positions and encodes the running fraction. Mean ablation alone does not distinguish whether the head uniformly aggre-gates previous positions, attends preferentially to 

x positions, or contributes through another nearby aggregation strategy. We therefore rate this plan as Partial: it tests the right general mechanism, but it does not cleanly isolate the key prediction in the hypothesis. 

F API Cost 

We estimate the API cost of running H YVE on the full 84-case A GENTIC INTERP BENCH bench-mark. We count tokens using each provider’s na-tive tokenizer API (Claude, Gemini) and tiktoken 

for GPT-5.4 and Qwen. Claude-Sonnet-4.6 incurs the largest estimated API cost, at $147.55 total ($1.76 per task), followed by GPT-5.4 at $77.47 total ($0.92 per task) and Gemini-3.1-Pro at $33.81 total ($0.40 per task). Qwen-3-Coder is self-hosted, so we report $0 marginal API cost and exclude GPU-hour costs; however, the full run required approximately 10 GPU-hours, which we exclude from the dollar-cost estimate because GPU cost depends on the hardware and pricing environment. The cost differences highlight the cost-performance tradeoff across backbones. Claude produces the highest Acc tag , Qdesc , and Sexec , but is also the most expensive. Gemini achieves the best Acc task while being 4× cheaper than Claude, and GPT-5.4 falls between them with the highest 

Sval . We report the token statistics and API Cost in Table 11. 

G Real Circuit Reference Annotation 

G.1 Setup Task and model. We use the three-operand ad-dition prompt template “ A + B + C = ” with 

A, B, C ∈ { 0, 1, . . . , 100 } and the answer lying in the range {0, 999 }, evaluated on Llama-3-8B. Our case study builds on the All-for-One (AF1) circuit, which identifies a sparse subgraph sufficient for this arithmetic behavior. 

Localized Circuit. Starting from the AF1 sub-graph, we construct a 10-component localized cir-cuit for explanation. The circuit contains five trans-fer attention heads in layers 15 and 16 (L15H3, L15H13, L15H31, L16H1, L16H21), three late MLPs (L20_MLP, L29_MLP, L31_MLP), two late attention heads with strong logit-lens sig-nal (L26H3, L28H18). We deliberately retain some causally redundant components (L29_MLP, L31_MLP, L26H3, L28H18) to test whether HYVE can distinguish mechanistic evidence from suggestive but non-causal signals. 

Reference annotation. AF1 establishes the high-level arithmetic circuit, but it does not provide the component-level roles needed for our evaluation. We therefore construct manual reference annota-tions for the 10 localized components. We start from the AF1 subgraph and run targeted interven-tions on 99 prompts of the form “ A + B + C = ”, restricted to examples the model answers correctly. The raw model has baseline accuracy 1.00 on this set. For attention heads, we inspect final-token at-tention patterns, edge ablations, last-query head ablations, and corrupt-operand activation patching. For MLPs, we use zero/mean/CAMA-style abla-tions, corrupt-operand patching, iterative pruning, and logit-lens projections. These experiments dis-tinguish primary operand-transfer heads, backup transfer heads, a late MLP that is necessary for accuracy but does not directly write in the answer direction, and components with strong logit-lens signal but weak causal effect. Tables 13 and 14 summarize the resulting reference roles. 20 Backbone Input tokens Output tokens Total cost Mean cost/case                 

> Claude-Sonnet-4.6 34.49M 2.94M $147.55 $1.76 GPT-5.4 16.73M 2.38M $77.47 $0.92 Gemini-3.1-Pro 12.77M 0.69M $33.81 $0.40 Qwen-3-Coder-30B-A3B 18.64M 1.31M $0.00 –

Table 11: Estimated token usage and API cost for running H YVE on the full 84-case A GENTIC INTERP BENCH 

benchmark. Qwen-3-Coder-30B-A3B is self-hosted, so we report zero marginal API cost and exclude GPU-hour costs.                                                     

> Comp. Reference Role Observation Hypothesis loop
> L15H13 Primary B-transfer head. Reads Bat the final query position, writes B-dependent information into the residual stream. Final token attention concen-trates strongly on operand B,near-zero mass elsewhere.
> Hypothesis (Iteration 1 ✓): L15H13 routes B’s identity to the final token. Ablation should cause a significant accuracy drop, with errors clustering near A+C.
> Validation :Supported. Ablation yields a large accuracy drop, activa-tion patching restores it. L16H1 Tertiary C-transfer head. Invisible in the full model but load-bearing once the stronger Croutes (L15H3, L15H31) are suppressed. Final-token atten-tion to operand C,with secondary attention to <BOS>
> and smaller weights on Band
> A
> Hypothesis (Iteration 1 ✗): L16H1 is a primary C-router. Ablation should drop accuracy significantly.
> Validation :Refuted. Ablation yields no accuracy drop.
> Hypothesis (Iteration 2 ✓): L16H1 is a backup C-router. Invisible under solo ablation, active when L15H3 and L15H31 are removed.
> Validation :Supported. Ablation together with (L15H3, L15H31) causes a significant further accuracy drop.

Table 12: Per-component exploration trace for two transfer heads of the AF1 circuit on Llama-3-8B. H YVE converges immediately on L15H13’s role as the primary B-transfer head, but requires a refuted iteration before re-hypothesizing L16H1 as a backup C-router. 

H Artifact Use, Licensing, and Data Content 

This work uses existing research artifacts and soft-ware libraries for MI evaluation. AGENTIC IN-

> TERP

BENCH is built on InterpBench and Tracr-derived models, which we use as controlled re-search testbeds with known circuit structure. We use TransformerLens and LangGraph as implemen-tation libraries for model inspection and agent or-chestration. We also use Llama-3-8B and Qwen-3-Coder-30B-A3B-Instruct only for research eval-uation and do not redistribute third-party model weights. Our released artifacts, including bench-mark annotations, prompt templates, and H YVE code, are intended for research use in circuit-explanation evaluation and should not be inter-preted as deployment-ready guarantees of model safety. We will release our own code and annota-tions under the MIT License. Our data are based on synthetic algorithmic tasks derived from Interp-Bench/RASP programs, consisting of task tokens and program outputs rather than human-authored or user-provided text. We manually checked the task vocabularies, input-output examples, prompt templates, annotations, and agent outputs for hu-man names, uniquely identifying information, and offensive content. The Llama-3-8B case study uses arithmetic prompts only. We found no PII or offen-sive content requiring anonymization. 21 Component Reference role Evidence used for annotation 

L16H21 Primary A-transfer head .This head carries information about the first operand to the final token. At the final token, L16H21 almost always attends to operand A. Mean attention on A is 0.979 , and A is the top key in all 99 prompts. This attention is causally important because zeroing this head’s final-token output reduces accuracy from 1.000 to 0.192 . Removing only the A edge reduces accuracy from 1.000 to 0.101 , while removing the B or C edge has no effect. In a corrupt-A patch, the model switches to the corrupt answer on 98 .0% of prompts, and the corrupt-vs-clean answer margin moves from −4.750 to 

+4 .156 .L15H13 Primary B-transfer head .This head moves information about operand B to the final to-ken. At the final token, L15H13 puts most of its attention on B (mean mass 0.878 ,top key in 98 /99 prompts). The B edge was also found to be causally relevant. Zeroing the head’s final-token output drops accuracy from 1.000 to 

0.374 , and removing only the B edge drops it to 0.465 . But removing A or C operand edges has no effect. Corrupt-B patching changes the corrupt-answer rate from 0.000 to 0.475 and gives a corrupt-answer logit gain of +2 .953 .L15H3 Primary C-transfer head. 

This head moves information about operand C to the final token, but its effect is weaker than the primary A and B

movers because C has backup transfer routes .At the final token, L15H3 puts most of its attention on C (mean mass 0.843 ,top key in 99 /99 prompts). Zeroing the head’s final-token output drops accuracy from 1.000 to 0.747 . The C edge is the causal one as removing only the C edge drops accuracy to 0.879 , while removing <BOS> , A, B, or = has no effect. Corrupt-C patching gives a corrupt-answer logit gain of +0 .734 ,but only changes the corrupt-answer rate from 0.000 to 0.020 . In iterative pruning over L15-L16 heads, L15H3 is the final survivor; removing it takes accuracy from 0.030 to 0.000 .L15H31 Backup C-transfer head. 

This head carries C-related information, but it is mostly re-dundant while L15H3 is active. Suppressing L15H3 exposes L15H31 as a load-bearing backup C route. At the final token, L15H31 attends mostly to C, with some attention to 

B(mean mass 0.505 on C and 0.340 on B; top key C in 90 /99 prompts). In the full model, zeroing its final-token output only drops accuracy from 1.000 

to 0.980 . After suppressing L15H3, zeroing L15H31 drops accuracy from 

0.747 to 0.414 , and removing only its C edge gives the same accuracy. This shows that L15H31’s C edge becomes important when L15H3 is absent. Corrupt-C patching in this setting gives a corrupt-answer logit gain of 

+0 .762 , compared with only +0 .221 in the full model. L16H1 Tertiary C-transfer backup head. The head carries C-related signal, but it becomes cleanly load-bearing only after the stronger C-transfer routes L15H3 and L15H31 are both suppressed. At the final token, L16H1 attends mostly to C, with substantial attention to 

<BOS> (mean mass 0.516 on C and 0.219 on <BOS> ). With only L15H3 suppressed, removing the C edge already hurts accuracy, from 0.747 to 0.515 .After suppressing both L15H3 and L15H31, zeroing L16H1 drops accuracy from 0.414 to 0.121 , and removing only its C edge gives the same accuracy. In this double-suppressed setting, corrupt-C patching gives a corrupt-answer logit gain of +0 .875 .

Table 13: Manual reference annotations for the AF1 transfer heads. The reference roles distinguish primary operand-transfer heads from backup C-transfer heads. 

22 Component Reference role Evidence used for annotation 

L20_MLP Latent arithmetic fea-ture builder . L20 is use-ful for the arithmetic task, but its output does not look like a direct answer vector or a clean inter-mediate such as A + B,

A + C, or B + C.Zeroing L20_MLP drops accuracy from 1.000 to 0.737 . CAMA-style ablation gives a smaller but nonzero drop of +0 .192 . Corrupt-operand patching gives similar corrupt-answer flip rates for A, B, and C (0.253 , 0.242 , 0.273 ), with corrupt-answer logit gains of +2 .03 , +2 .20 , and +2 .31 , suggesting that L20 does not strongly prefer one operand over the others. Also, candidate-target logit lens is weak. The answer top-5 rate is only 0.051 , and pair-sum targets remain near zero. Directionally, the output is only weakly aligned with the answer direction (cos = 0 .036 ) and is not an amplification of the pre-MLP residual (cos = −0.188 ). We therefore annotate L20 as a latent feature builder rather than an explicit answer writer. L29_MLP Answer-related but re-dundant MLP . L29’s output points toward the correct answer in projec-tion tests, but removing it does not hurt the model on this task. A candidate-target logit lens on L29_MLP recovers the answer at top-5 rate 0.394 ,with mean answer logit +8 .35 , while pair-sum and operand targets stay near zero. Direction decomposition gives DLA(answer) = +8 .35 compared with DLA(random) = +0 .97 , so the output is answer-related. However, direct zero-ablation leaves accuracy unchanged ( 1.000 to 1.000 ), and CAMA-style ablation also gives zero drop. Corrupt-operand patching gives nonzero corrupt-answer logit gains around +1 .3, but never flips the prediction. We therefore annotate L29 as answer-related but causally redundant in the full circuit. L31_MLP Strong answer projec-tion but causally redun-dant MLP . L31 has the strongest answer signal under logit-lens-style pro-jection, but the signal is broad rather than answer-specific, and the compo-nent is not necessary in isolation. This MLP has the strongest single-MLP answer lens signal, with answer top-5 rate 

0.566 and mean answer logit +15 .67 . Direction decomposition also gives large DLA(answer) = +15 .67 compared with DLA(random) = −0.16 . However, the projection is not specific to the final answer: pair sums and individual operands also receive high mean logits ( A + B: 14 .57 , B + C: 14 .54 , A + C: 14 .48 , A

+15 .07 , B +14 .96 , C +14 .98 ). Isolated zero-ablation barely changes accuracy (1.000 → 0.990 ), CAMA-style ablation gives zero drop, and corrupt-operand patching produces zero corrupt-answer flips. We therefore annotate L31 as lens-positive but causally redundant in the full circuit. L26H3 Lens-positive <BOS> -sink head . This late attention head has answer-related projection under logit lens, but its attention is concentrated on <BOS> rather than the operand tokens. Per-head logit lens ranks L26H3 second among late attention heads, with top-1 rate 

0.162 and top-3 rate 0.394 . Its final-token attention is dominated by <BOS> . <BOS> 

mass is 0.587 , while total operand mass is only 0.027 (21 .7× smaller). In targeted pruning over the top late-attention lens heads, removing L26H3 leaves accuracy at 

1.000 . We therefore annotate it as a lens-positive <BOS> -sink head rather than a causally necessary arithmetic component. L28H18 Lens-positive <BOS> /anchor head . This is the strongest late-attention logit-lens head, but its attention is not primarily on operands and it is causally redundant in isolation. Per-head logit lens ranks L28H18 first among late attention heads, with top-1 rate 

0.222 and top-3 rate 0.455 . Its final-token attention is <BOS> -leaning: <BOS> mass is 0.445 , while total operand mass is 0.102 (4.4× smaller). The remaining non-<BOS> mass is concentrated more on positional anchors such as = than on operands. In targeted pruning over the top late-attention lens heads, removing L28H18 leaves accuracy at 1.000 . We therefore annotate it as lens-positive but causally redundant. 

Table 14: Manual reference annotations for the late-layer AF1 components. These components distinguish causal task-relevant computation from answer-correlated projection evidence. L20_MLP is causally relevant and carries operand-dependent signal, but does not directly write the final answer or a clean pair-sum representation. In contrast, L29_MLP, L31_MLP, L26H3, and L28H18 show answer-related projection signals but have little or no isolated causal effect in the full circuit. 

23