International Journal of Information Security manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
NeuroGraph: An AI Graph-Driven Neuro-Symbolic Framework for
Explainable Threat Reasoning in Advanced Manufacturing
Padmeswari Nandiya1,b, Ahmad Mohsin1,a, Iqbal H. Sarker1,c, Ahmed Ibrahim1,d, Helge
Janicke1,e
1 School of Science (Computing & Security Discipline), Edith Cowan University, Perth, WA 6027, Australia
Received: date / Accepted: date
Abstract The growing complexity of cyber-physical attack
surfaces in advanced manufacturing environments has made
reliable cyber threat intelligence analysis increasingly chal-
lenging. While large language models and retrieval-augmented
generation have enhanced cyber threat intelligence capabili-
ties, text-based approaches remain prone to hallucinations and
lack structured reasoning over interconnected threats. Graph-
based retrieval-augmented generation partially addresses this
limitation but often fails to support ontology-consistent multi-
hop reasoning and transparent evidence tracing across het-
erogeneous cybersecurity knowledge. This paper proposes a
graph-grounded neuro-symbolic framework that integrates
ontology-aware symbolic query generation, knowledge graph
retrieval, and neural language generation to enable accurate
and explainable threat analysis across information technology
and operational technology domains. The proposed frame-
work employs a dual-large language model architecture in
which the first model translates natural-language queries into
executable Cypher statements for symbolic graph retrieval,
while the second generates responses exclusively from the re-
trieved graph evidence. Experimental evaluation on publicly
available cyber threat intelligence benchmarks demonstrates
consistent improvements over the published baseline in rea-
soning accuracy while reducing hallucinations, improving
multi-hop reasoning, and increasing robustness against ad-
versarial perturbations. Runtime and explainability analyses
further show that the framework maintains interactive infer-
ence performance while exposing graph-grounded reasoning
artifacts that enable analysts to inspect and verify each stage
of the reasoning process. These results demonstrate the poten-
tial of graph-grounded neuro-symbolic reasoning to provide
a Corresponding author: a.mohsin@ecu.edu.au
be-mail: p.nandiya@ecu.edu.au
ce-mail: m.sarker@ecu.edu.au
de-mail: ahmed.ibrahim@ecu.edu.au
ee-mail: h.janicke@ecu.edu.au
scalable, interpretable, and reliable cyber threat intelligence
for next-generation Industry 5.0 environments.
Keywords Explainable Artificial Intelligence · Large
Language Models · Cybersecurity · Advanced Manufacturing ·
Knowledge Graphs · Neuro-symbolic
1 Introduction
Industry 5.0 represents the emerging evolution of advanced
manufacturing, placing emphasis on Human-centric collab-
oration between domain experts and intelligent systems [1].
In this context, Industrial Control Systems (ICS) constitute a
foundational component, as they govern and automate pro-
cesses across modern industrial environments. The increasing
integration of intelligent and connected technologies within
ICS amplifies the importance of AI-driven assistants capable
of supporting cyber resilience and informed decision-making
[2].
ICS are extensively deployed across critical infrastruc-
ture sectors, including energy, manufacturing, and essential
utilities, where their secure and continuous operation is of
strategic importance [3]. However, the ongoing digitalization
and increasing connectivity of these systems have substan-
tially expanded their attack surface, resulting in heightened
exposure to cyber threats [4]. This growing vulnerability has
been demonstrated by several high-profile cyber incidents. No-
tably, the Stuxnet attack in 2010 and the Triton attack in 2017
illustrated the capability of adversaries to manipulate and dis-
rupt physical industrial processes through cyber means [5, 6].
More recently, the 2021 breach of the Oldsmar water treat-
ment facility revealed that even small-scale municipal ICS
deployments remain susceptible to cyber compromise [7].
Collectively, these incidents demonstrate that cyber attacks
targeting ICS extend beyond digital infrastructures to pro-
arXiv:2609.00604v1  [cs.CR]  1 Sep 2026


2
duce tangible physical consequences, emphasizing the need
for intelligent security mechanisms capable of assisting an-
alysts in understanding and mitigating complex multi-stage
cyber-physical attack scenarios.
Recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) have
significantly improved cyber threat intelligence (CTI) analysis
through Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG), enabling
language models to access external cybersecurity knowledge
during inference [8–11]. While promising, conventional text-
based RAG systems remain susceptible to hallucinations and
often struggle to perform structured reasoning over intercon-
nected cyber-physical environments where attack paths span
information technology (IT), operational technology (OT),
and physical processes [12–14]. To address these limitations,
recent studies have proposed Graph Retrieval-Augmented
Generation (Graph-RAG), which leverages knowledge graphs
to provide structured and relational reasoning across assets,
vulnerabilities, weaknesses, and attack patterns [15]. Al-
though Graph-RAG represents a significant advancement
over text-only retrieval, existing approaches remain limited in
supporting the heterogeneous, multi-hop reasoning required
in Industry 5.0 cyber-physical environments.
Several practical challenges continue to hinder the deploy-
ment of Graph-RAG in industrial cybersecurity. First, cyber-
security knowledge is inherently heterogeneous, requiring the
integration of diverse intelligence sources such as CVE, CWE,
MITRE ATT&CK, CAPEC, asset inventories, and incident
reports across both IT and OT domains [11, 16, 17]. Existing
cybersecurity ontologies frequently model only subsets of
this ecosystem, leaving important cross-domain relationships
insufficiently represented [18, 19]. Second, even when com-
prehensive knowledge graphs are available, cybersecurity ana-
lysts rarely interact directly with graph query languages, while
existing graph-based retrieval systems provide limited support
for transparent multi-hop reasoning over complex industrial
environments [20]. Finally, although Graph-RAG enables lan-
guage models to retrieve structured graph knowledge, many
existing systems still provide limited reasoning transparency,
making it difficult for analysts to inspect intermediate reason-
ing steps and verify how conclusions are derived [21, 22].
These challenges highlight the need for a graph-grounded
reasoning framework capable of combining structured sym-
bolic reasoning with the flexibility of neural language models
while maintaining explainability for cyber-physical threat
analysis. These challenges motivate the development of a
graph-grounded neuro-symbolic framework that combines
the transparency of symbolic reasoning with the flexibility
of neural language models to enable explainable and reliable
cyber threat analysis across interconnected IT and OT envi-
ronments. Accordingly, this paper proposes NeuroGraph, a
graph-grounded neuro-symbolic framework for threat reason-
ing in advanced manufacturing systems, implemented through
the GRICS (Graph-Integrated Retrieval for Industry-Centric
Security) architecture. GRICS combines a cyber-physical
knowledge graph with a dual-LLM architecture. The first
LLM translates analyst queries into ontology-aware Cypher
queries for symbolic knowledge retrieval, while the second
LLM generates natural-language responses using only the
retrieved graph evidence. By separating symbolic retrieval
from language generation, GRICS provides graph-grounded
reasoning that improves transparency, supports multi-hop
inference across heterogeneous cyber-physical entities, and
reduces unsupported model generation.
GRICS is built upon the BRIDG-ICS ontology devel-
oped in the previous work [23], which models cyber-physical
assets, vulnerabilities, weaknesses, attack techniques, and
adversarial behaviours within a unified industrial knowledge
graph. Leveraging this ontology, GRICS enables explainable
graph-grounded multi-hop reasoning across interconnected
IT and OT environments. The methodological novelty of
GRICS lies not merely in combining knowledge graphs with
large language models, but in the way its neuro-symbolic
architecture couples neural and symbolic components dur-
ing retrieval and reasoning. Unlike Graph-RAG approaches
that primarily rely on embedding similarity, graph expan-
sion, clustering, or learned graph representations to construct
context, GRICS adopts symbolic Cypher execution as the pri-
mary evidence-retrieval mechanism. The language model first
translates an analyst query into an ontology-constrained exe-
cutable program, and only evidence returned through explicit
graph execution is admitted to downstream answer generation.
Embedding-based retrieval is activated only when the initial
symbolic query fails and serves solely to identify a graph
anchor from which an ontology-compliant Cypher query is
regenerated. Consequently, neural retrieval assists symbolic
reasoning rather than replacing it, enabling deterministic
graph traversal, ontology-consistent multi-hop reasoning, and
explicit evidence traceability across interconnected IT and
OT cybersecurity entities.
The proposed framework assumes the availability of a
curated cybersecurity knowledge graph derived from the
BRIDG-ICS ontology and focuses on graph-grounded threat
reasoning rather than ontology construction or maintenance.
Consequently, the current study does not address automated
ontology evolution, continuous cyber threat intelligence in-
gestion, or real-time knowledge graph synchronization. These
assumptions, together with the scope and current limitations
of the framework, are discussed in detail in Section IV. The
primary contributions of GRICS are summarised as follows:
nandiya2025bridgicsaigroundedknowledgegraphs
– Graph-Grounded Threat Reasoning for Smart Manu-
facturing. We propose a graph-grounded retrieval frame-
work that combines knowledge graph retrieval with LLM
reasoning to enable multi-hop inference across assets,
vulnerabilities, weaknesses, and attack techniques for
cyber-physical threat analysis.


3
– Symbolic-First Neuro-Symbolic Retrieval. We intro-
duce a symbolic-first retrieval architecture in which
ontology-constrained Cypher execution constitutes the pri-
mary reasoning pathway, while embedding retrieval is re-
stricted to recovery of graph anchors following symbolic-
query failure. Unlike hybrid retrieval schemes in which
neural and symbolic evidence are independently com-
bined, GRICS requires recovered anchors to be converted
back into executable ontology-compliant Cypher queries
before evidence is admitted to downstream reasoning.
– Explainable NeuroGraph Reasoning. We develop a
transparent reasoning workflow that exposes the generated
Cypher query, retrieved graph evidence, and grounded
natural-language response, enabling analysts to inspect
and verify each stage of the reasoning process.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 introduces the technical preliminaries underlying
graph-grounded cyber threat reasoning. Section 3 reviews
the related research and identifies the existing research gaps.
Section 4 formulates the research problem and outlines the
assumptions and scope of the proposed framework. Sec-
tion 5 presents the proposed graph-grounded neuro-symbolic
framework. Section 6 describes the experimental evaluation
and discusses explainability and robustness analyses. Finally,
Section 7 concludes the paper and outlines future research
directions.
2 Preliminaries
2.1 Cybersecurity Knowledge Graphs
In Industry 5.0 environments, Industrial Control Systems
(ICS) face increasingly complex cyber threats due to inter-
connected and AI-enabled infrastructures [1, 24]. Knowledge
graphs (KGs) provide a structured representation that inte-
grates diverse cybersecurity data across IT and OT domains,
enabling a unified and machine-interpretable view of sys-
tem entities and their relationships [16, 23, 25]. These rela-
tionships support multi-hop reasoning over interconnected
components, facilitating the analysis of attack dependen-
cies and system-level risks [26]. Formally, a cybersecurity
knowledge graph is represented by the graph model shown in
Equation (1):
G = (V,E,R)
(1)
2.2 Graph Retrieval-Augmented Generation
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) has the potential
to enhance LLMs by incorporating external knowledge dur-
ing inference, thereby improving factual grounding [27–29].
However, it relies on unstructured text, limiting its abil-
ity to capture relationships between cybersecurity entities.
Graph-based RAG (Graph-RAG) addresses this limitation
by retrieving structured subgraphs 𝑅⊆𝐺from a knowledge
graph 𝐺, enabling multi-hop reasoning across interconnected
entities [30–32]. Graph-RAG enables LLMs to reason over
structured, multi-hop knowledge by integrating symbolic
graph traversal with embedding-based similarity search.
2.3 Neuro-Symbolic Reasoning
Symbolic–semantic reasoning maps natural language inputs to
executable structured representations over knowledge graphs,
enabling precise, explainable inference. Given an input 𝑞∈𝑋∗,
the goal is to derive 𝑐∈𝐶such that executing it on graph 𝐺
yields relevant results, 𝑅= exec(𝑐,𝐺). This combines seman-
tic interpretation with symbolic graph operations to support
multi-hop reasoning over interconnected cybersecurity en-
tities, providing traceable, context-aware threat analysis in
cyber–physical environments.
2.4 Cyber-Physical Threat Modelling
Cyber-physical threat modelling represents security events as
interconnected relationships among digital assets, operational
components, vulnerabilities, weaknesses, attack patterns, ad-
versarial techniques, and physical processes [33]. In indus-
trial environments, security incidents rarely remain confined
to a single software component or network layer. Instead,
compromise can propagate across information technology
(IT) and operational technology (OT) domains, affecting
industrial assets, control processes, and potentially physical
operations [2].
A cyber-physical attack can therefore be viewed as a
sequence of dependent security events rather than an isolated
vulnerability [11]. For example, exploitation of a software
vulnerability may expose an underlying weakness, enable a
particular attack pattern, correspond to a known adversarial
technique, and subsequently affect an operational asset or
process [34]. Representing these dependencies explicitly
supports the analysis of multi-stage attack paths. Such analysis
requires consideration of both semantic relationships among
cybersecurity concepts and operational relationships among
assets, systems, and networked components [23, 35].
These structured threat representations are particularly
important in Industry 5.0 environments, where increased
connectivity among intelligent systems, industrial assets, and
human operators creates complex interdependencies [36].
Cyber-physical threat modelling therefore provides a con-
ceptual foundation for analyzing multi-hop attack scenarios,
correlating heterogeneous cybersecurity information, and


4
supporting explainable security decision-making across inter-
connected IT and OT infrastructures.
3 Related Work
This section reviews the literature most relevant to graph-
grounded cyber threat intelligence and positions the proposed
GRICS framework within the current state of the art. The
reviewed studies were selected to represent the principal re-
search directions relevant to this work, including cybersecurity
knowledge graphs, retrieval-augmented generation, Graph-
RAG, neuro-symbolic reasoning, and explainable artificial
intelligence. Priority was given to recent studies (2022–2025)
to reflect the rapid development of Graph-RAG and large
language models in cybersecurity, while seminal works were
retained where necessary to provide foundational context.
Representative studies were further selected based on their rel-
evance to industrial control systems, cyber-physical systems,
and cyber threat intelligence. Based on these criteria, the lit-
erature is organized into four themes: (i) retrieval-augmented
generation and Graph-RAG, (ii) neuro-symbolic retrieval and
reasoning, (iii) threat reasoning in cybersecurity, and (iv)
ontological modelling for cybersecurity. This structure allows
GRICS’s research gaps to be systematically identified.
3.1 Retrieval-Augmented Generation for Cyber Threat
Intelligence
RAG for LLM Learning. Large language models (LLMs)
excel at natural-language understanding and generation but
rely on parametric knowledge, limiting factual reliability and
adaptability to evolving domains [37]. Retrieval-Augmented
Generation (RAG) addresses these issues by grounding out-
puts in external knowledge, improving factual accuracy and
timeliness [27, 38]. However, most RAG frameworks retrieve
from unstructured text [39, 40], which offers limited struc-
ture and is insufficient for multi-step reasoning over complex
relations [41].
Recent advances have sought to overcome these limita-
tions by integrating structured graph-based knowledge into
retrieval-augmented reasoning [15]. Graph representations
explicitly encode entities and relations, enabling richer contex-
tual grounding and more effective multi-step inference. This
has led to the emergence of Graph-RAG frameworks, which
extend traditional RAG by leveraging structured knowledge
to improve retrieval quality and reasoning interpretability. Ex-
isting Graph-RAG frameworks improve structured retrieval
but remain limited in supporting deterministic graph traversal,
ontology-aware reasoning, and transparent multi-hop infer-
ence over heterogeneous cyber-physical knowledge. These
limitations motivate the graph-grounded neuro-symbolic de-
sign adopted by GRICS.
Graph-RAG Methods for Cyber Threat Intelligence.
Following the emergence of Graph-RAG frameworks, existing
approaches differ in how graph structures are incorporated
into retrieval and reasoning processes. These systems can be
broadly characterized according to their underlying retrieval
strategies, which directly influence their ability to support
multi-hop reasoning, scalability, and interpretability.
The first category consists of embedding-based retrieval
methods, which map entities and relations into continuous
vector spaces and perform semantic similarity search [42–
44]. These approaches support efficient large-scale retrieval
and are widely adopted in RAG pipelines. However, because
they rely on approximate matching, they do not explicitly
enforce structural constraints and may therefore retrieve se-
mantically relevant but causally invalid connections. A sec-
ond category addresses this limitation through subgraph
and multi-hop expansion, where reasoning is performed by
iteratively exploring connected graph neighborhoods. Sys-
tems such as Think-on-Graph 2.0 [45] explicitly guide LLM
reasoning through graph traversal, while KGMP [46] and
DRKG [47] introduce structured multi-hop reasoning strate-
gies to improve interpretability. Similarly, SimGRAG [30]
and KG2RAG [31] retrieve subgraphs to capture broader rela-
tional context. Although these approaches improve multi-step
reasoning, unconstrained expansion in densely connected
graphs may introduce irrelevant or redundant paths.
The third category focuses on hierarchical and struc-
tured retrieval methods, which seek to improve scalability
and support reasoning over larger or longer-context knowl-
edge spaces. RAPTOR [48], for instance, organizes infor-
mation into tree-like structures for recursive retrieval, while
GraphRAG [49] employs clustering and summarisation to
improve knowledge organisation. Recent frameworks such as
GRAG [32] further extend graph-centric retrieval to improve
flexibility and retrieval effectiveness. Finally, the fourth cate-
gory comprises neural graph reasoning approaches, which
use graph neural networks and hybrid architectures to learn
complex dependencies directly from graph structure [50–
52]. These methods provide strong representation-learning
capabilities and can capture complex relational patterns. How-
ever, their reasoning processes are often encoded implicitly
within model parameters, which can limit transparency and
make intermediate reasoning paths more difficult to inspect.
Despite these advances, most Graph-RAG systems still pro-
vide limited support for explicit, constraint-driven reasoning.
As shown in Table 1, symbolic querying remains under-
used, restricting deterministic and interpretable multi-hop
inference. This limitation is particularly important in cyberse-
curity, where general-purpose Graph-RAG systems often lack
cyber-physical semantics, attacker-behaviour models, and
explicit IT/OT integration required for Industry 5.0 threat
intelligence. Cybersecurity-oriented RAG systems such as
MoRSE [53] and ProveRAG [54] primarily rely on unstruc-


5
tured text retrieval, while graph-based approaches such as
CyKG-RAG [55] and GraphRAG under Fire [56] improve
structured retrieval but remain limited in representing com-
plex, multi-stage cyber–physical dependencies.
3.2 Neuro-Symbolic Reasoning in Graph-RAG
Neuro-symbolic approaches aim to integrate data-driven
learning with structured reasoning over knowledge graphs,
combining the flexibility of neural models with the consis-
tency of symbolic representations [57, 58]. In Graph-RAG
systems, this paradigm enables the use of learned embed-
dings for retrieval while leveraging graph structures to provide
contextual grounding for reasoning [59].
In practice, many existing approaches emphasize neural
retrieval mechanisms, where embeddings or learned repre-
sentations guide the selection of relevant nodes and sub-
graphs [60]. While effective for scalability and generalization,
such approaches do not explicitly enforce logical constraints,
and reasoning is often guided by similarity rather than struc-
tural validity [61]. As a result, multi-hop inference may
include semantically relevant but structurally inconsistent re-
lationships, particularly in complex domains [62]. Symbolic
querying (e.g., Cypher, SPARQL) provides an alternative by
enabling deterministic and constraint-driven traversal over
knowledge graphs [63–65]. By enforcing explicit structural
conditions, symbolic methods ensure that all inferred re-
lationships adhere to valid graph connections, supporting
precise and interpretable reasoning. Existing neuro-symbolic
Graph-RAG systems, however, rarely integrate explicit sym-
bolic query generation and neural retrieval within a unified
reasoning pipeline. As a result, deterministic graph traversal,
ontology-aware reasoning, and transparent evidence tracing
remain underexplored, particularly in cyber-physical threat
intelligence.
Recent graph-grounded reasoning approaches have in-
creasingly moved beyond static retrieval toward multi-strategy,
agentic, and neuro-symbolic architectures. BYOKG-RAG
combines LLM-generated graph artifacts, including can-
didate entities, reasoning paths, and OpenCypher queries,
with specialized graph-retrieval tools and iterative refine-
ment over heterogeneous knowledge graphs [66]. SymAgent
adopts an agentic neuro-symbolic architecture in which an
Agent-Planner extracts symbolic reasoning structures from
the knowledge graph and an Agent-Executor dynamically
invokes external and graph-based tools to address complex
reasoning tasks and incomplete graph knowledge [67]. In par-
allel, TUNSR investigates a unified neuro-symbolic reasoning
framework that combines neural representations with sym-
bolic first-order logic reasoning over dynamically constructed
reasoning graphs [68]. These approaches demonstrate im-
portant advances toward adaptive graph interaction, iterative
tool use, and tighter integration between neural and symbolic
reasoning.
GRICS differs from these recent approaches in both its rea-
soning objective and the functional roles assigned to its neural
and symbolic components. BYOKG-RAG employs multiple
graph-retrieval strategies to improve knowledge-graph ques-
tion answering, whereas GRICS constrains accepted evidence
to ontology-compliant Cypher execution over the BRIDG-ICS
cybersecurity ontology. Compared with agentic architectures
such as SymAgent, which rely on iterative planning and
dynamic tool invocation, GRICS adopts a more constrained
dual-LLM reasoning pipeline in which the first LLM gener-
ates executable symbolic queries and the second synthesises
responses only after graph evidence has been retrieved. Rela-
tive to broader neuro-symbolic frameworks such as TUNSR,
GRICS is specifically designed for explainable cybersecu-
rity reasoning across vulnerability, weakness, attack-pattern,
MITRE ATT&CK, and industrial-asset relationships.
A key distinction is that semantic retrieval in GRICS
cannot independently determine the final reasoning evidence.
Embedding-based retrieval is used to recover candidate graph
anchors when symbolic retrieval fails, but the recovered can-
didate must subsequently pass through ontology-compliant
Cypher generation and graph execution before being supplied
to the Answer-LLM. This establishes an explicit verifica-
tion boundary between semantic interpretation and factual
retrieval. Consequently, the principal advantage of GRICS
is not unrestricted reasoning flexibility, but the combina-
tion of neural adaptability with deterministic graph traversal,
ontology consistency, and end-to-end evidence traceability
required for cybersecurity decision support.
3.3 Threat Reasoning in Cybersecurity
Threat reasoning has become an increasingly important re-
search direction for supporting cyber threat intelligence (CTI)
analysis, enabling systems to infer relationships among vul-
nerabilities, attack techniques, threat actors, and defensive
actions rather than performing isolated information retrieval.
Recent advances have leveraged large language models and
knowledge graphs to improve structured reasoning over cy-
bersecurity knowledge.
Fieblinger et al. [69] combine knowledge graphs with
large language models to transform unstructured CTI reports
into actionable threat intelligence, facilitating contextual
analysis and information extraction. Wu et al. [70] further
extend this direction by integrating knowledge graphs with
large language models for cyber threat intelligence credi-
bility assessment, demonstrating how structured semantic
relationships can improve the reliability of CTI. More recently,
CTI-Thinker [71] incorporates ATT&CK-aligned knowledge
graphs within a Graph-RAG framework to support attack
intent inference and CTI question answering.


6
Table 1: Comparison of representative RAG and Graph-RAG approaches highlighting gaps in reasoning, constraints, and
retrieval mechanisms.
Work (Year)
Symbolic
Rea-
soning
Multi-hop Con-
sistency
Constraint-
based Retrieval
Embedding-
based Retrieval
Retrieval Type
KG
LLM
Fine-
Tuning
GraphRAG (2025) [49]
✗
✗
✗
✓
Clustering
/
Sub-
graph
✓
✗
KG2RAG (2025) [31]
✗
✗
✗
✓
Graph-guided
Re-
trieval
✓
✗
GRAG (2025) [32]
✗
✗
✗
✓
Graph Retrieval
✓
✗
GNN-RAG (2024) [52]
✗
✗
✗
✓
Neural Graph Rea-
soning
✓
✗
MoRSE (2024) [53]
✗
✗
✗
✓
Textual Retrieval
✗
✗
CyKG-RAG (2024) [55]
✗
△
✗
✓
KG-based Retrieval
✓
✗
GRICS (Ours)
✓
✓
✓
✓
Neural + Symbolic
(Cypher-based)
✓
✓
These studies demonstrate that structured knowledge sub-
stantially improves cybersecurity reasoning compared with
language-model-only approaches. However, existing methods
primarily rely on GraphRAG or embedding-based retrieval
over cybersecurity knowledge graphs. Consequently, the rea-
soning process remains largely implicit within the language
model and provides limited support for deterministic graph
traversal or explicit verification of intermediate reasoning
steps. In contrast, this work investigates graph-grounded
neuro-symbolic reasoning through ontology-aware Cypher
generation and symbolic graph execution, enabling transpar-
ent multi-hop reasoning in which every generated response
can be traced to explicit graph evidence.
3.4 Ontological Modelling in Cybersecurity
Ontological modelling has been central to cybersecurity
research, enabling structured and machine-interpretable rep-
resentations of threat intelligence, vulnerabilities, and at-
tack behaviours. Early efforts such as MITRE ATT&CK and
CAPEC ontologies [72, 73], along with frameworks like
STIX [74], CVE, and CWE, established standardised repre-
sentations to support knowledge sharing and analysis. Recent
work extends these foundations into Cyber Knowledge Graphs
(CKGs), integrating heterogeneous data sources and capturing
relationships among entities for contextual reasoning [75–
79]. However, these approaches often emphasize structural
completeness over adaptive reasoning, limiting their ability
to support dynamic, multi-hop analysis in cyber–physical
environments.
As highlighted in Table 1, current RAG and Graph-RAG
approaches do not provide integrated symbolic reasoning,
cyber–physical modelling, or explainable threat analysis,
which restricts their applicability in complex, safety-critical
settings. These limitations are addressed by the proposed
GRICS framework.
4 Problem Statement
The increasing adoption of Industry 5.0 technologies has
created highly interconnected cyber-physical environments
spanning information technology (IT), operational technol-
ogy (OT), industrial assets, vulnerabilities, and attacker be-
haviours. Effective cyber threat intelligence (CTI) therefore
requires reasoning across heterogeneous entities and multiple
abstraction levels rather than relying on isolated document
retrieval or keyword matching.
Although Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) im-
proves factual grounding through external knowledge, con-
ventional text-based retrieval lacks explicit representations
of relationships among cybersecurity entities. Recent Graph-
RAG approaches incorporate knowledge graphs, but many
still rely on embedding similarity, heuristic graph expansion,
or summarisation, limiting deterministic traversal, ontology
compliance, and transparent multi-hop reasoning. Cyberse-
curity analysts also typically express investigation goals in
natural language rather than graph query languages, creating
a need for systems that can interpret user intent while preserv-
ing ontology constraints and reasoning traceability. GRICS
addresses these limitations through a unified neuro-symbolic
pipeline that combines ontology-aware Cypher generation,
symbolic graph retrieval, embedding-assisted query recovery,
and grounded natural-language response generation. This
work is developed under the following assumptions:
– The cybersecurity knowledge graph is constructed from a
trusted ontology and accurately represents cyber-physical
entities and their relationships.
– Retrieved graph information is considered authoritative,
while the language model is responsible only for inter-
preting and summarizing retrieved evidence rather than
generating unsupported knowledge.
– Analysts interact with the framework using natural-language
queries rather than directly writing graph query languages
such as Cypher.
The scope of this work is limited to graph-grounded
cyber threat reasoning over the BRIDG-ICS ontology. The


7
framework does not address automatic ontology construction,
knowledge graph population, or ontology evolution. Like-
wise, although explainability is achieved through transparent
graph-grounded reasoning artifacts, formal human-subject
evaluation of analyst trust and cognitive workload is beyond
the scope of this study and remains an important direction
for future work.
5 Proposed GRICS Framework
This section presents the proposed NeuroGraph-based neuro-
symbolic reasoning framework, referred to as Graph-Integrated
Retrieval for Industry-Centric Security (GRICS), for ad-
vanced threat reasoning in Industry 5.0 cyber–physical en-
vironments. GRICS is implemented as a domain-specific
knowledge-graph-based retrieval-augmented generation (KG-
RAG) framework that enables multi-hop attack-path analy-
sis, threat-impact assessment, and mitigation-strategy gen-
eration by combining structured cyber–physical knowledge
with large language model reasoning. The framework inte-
grates three core components: (i) a cyber–physical knowledge
graph derived from the BRIDG-ICS ontology that unifies
information-technology and operational-technology assets,
(ii) a dual-LLM pipeline that separates ontology-aware sym-
bolic retrieval from answer synthesis, and (iii) a threat-centric
KG-RAG question-answering dataset designed to support
multi-hop reasoning and attack-scenario analysis.
The design of GRICS is informed by recent advances in
knowledge-graph-guided RAG systems, which demonstrate
that structured knowledge can improve retrieval precision,
interpretability, and reasoning robustness. GRICS extends
these approaches through neuro-symbolic graph reasoning by
combining large language model interpretation with ontology-
constrained Cypher generation and explicit knowledge-graph
traversal. In contrast to general-domain KG-RAG approaches,
GRICS is tailored to Industrial Control Systems security,
with a focus on interpretable attack-path reasoning and cyber–
physical dependency modelling. An overview of the GRICS
architecture is shown in Figure 1. The implementation details
and source code are publicly available1.
5.1 Data Collection
Industrial cyber-physical environments are highly intercon-
nected and often exhibit cascading security risks, where
vulnerabilities in network infrastructure or security controls
can propagate across multiple factory components. Capturing
such interactions requires integrating heterogeneous cyberse-
curity information from both cyber and operational domains.
1https://github.com/ahmadspm/Resellient-Industry-5.0
--kG-Digital-Twins/tree/main
The datasets used in this study are collected from multiple
authoritative cybersecurity repositories, including Common
Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE), Common Platform Enu-
meration (CPE), Common Weakness Enumeration (CWE),
CAPEC, MITRE ATT&CK, and industrial asset information
obtained from real-world Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT)
and Operational Technology (OT) testbeds. These hetero-
geneous sources are transformed into node and edge CSV
files and represented using the labelled property graph (LPG)
model, in which cybersecurity entities are encoded as la-
belled nodes, relationships are represented as typed edges,
and descriptive attributes are stored as node or relationship
properties. The resulting LPG is implemented in Neo4j, which
provides the graph database environment used for knowledge-
graph construction, storage, and subsequent Cypher-based
retrieval.
5.2 Knowledge Sources and Ontology
The imported cybersecurity datasets are organized accord-
ing to the BRIDG-ICS ontology [23], which provides the
semantic structure for integrating industrial assets, software
products, vendors, vulnerabilities (CVE), weaknesses (CWE),
attack patterns (CAPEC), MITRE ATT&CK techniques, and
operational zones. Each entity is assigned a source-specific
unique identifier and mapped to the corresponding ontology
class, helping align records across heterogeneous cyberse-
curity sources and prevent duplicate nodes during graph
construction.
The ontology model uses a domain-driven design where
cybersecurity concepts are modelled as classes and linked by
typed relationships. Relations such as has_Vulnerability, At-
tack(Asset), has_CWE, use_Technique, and located_In(Zone)
enable explainable multi-hop reasoning across cyber-physical
attack paths. Relationships are instantiated only when sup-
ported by source data mappings or defined in the BRIDG-ICS
ontology, preventing unsupported associations during graph
construction. In this study, a fixed snapshot of the BRIDG-
ICS knowledge graph is used for all training and evaluation to
ensure a consistent experimental setup. Cybersecurity records
from selected sources are preprocessed offline into normalised
nodes and relationships following the BRIDG-ICS schema
and then imported into the graph. When the graph is updated
outside evaluation, embeddings are generated for new or mod-
ified nodes to keep the embedding-based fallback retrieval
mechanism consistent.
5.2.1 Knowledge Graph Construction
The knowledge-graph construction pipeline consists of four
stages: source extraction, entity normalization, relationship
mapping, and graph ingestion. First, records from the selected
cybersecurity sources are converted into intermediate node


8
Fig. 1: GRICS KG-RAG architecture and dual LLM reasoning pipeline.
and relationship tables. Second, entities such as CVE, CWE,
CAPEC, MITRE ATT&CK techniques, and CPE records are
normalised using canonical identifiers to align heterogeneous
sources and reduce duplication. Third, relationships among
these entities, together with industrial assets and software
components, are established according to the BRIDG-ICS
schema. Finally, the resulting node and relationship tables are
imported into the graph database for graph-based retrieval and
reasoning. The complete BRIDG-ICS ontology schema, rela-
tionship definitions, and associated implementation resources
are available in the project repository.2
Based on the integrated dataset, the resulting knowledge
graph is represented as G = (V,E), where V denotes the set
of cyber-physical entities and E represents the semantic and
operational relationships among them. A principal reasoning
chain represented in the graph is:
Industry 5.0 Assets →CVE →CWE →CAPEC →
MITRE ATT&CK.
This structure enables multi-hop reasoning for attack-path
analysis and threat attribution across interconnected cyber-
2https://github.com/ahmadspm/Industry-5.0--Intellige
nt-Threat-Analytics-KGs-and-LLMs
security entities. In addition to these semantic relationships,
the graph models operational interactions through typed edges
(𝑢,𝑣) ∈Ecomm using the relation COMMUNICATES_WITH. These
edges are enriched with risk-related attributes, including pEx-
ploit, riskWeight, controlStrength, and costAttack, supporting
quantitative assessment of vulnerability propagation.
5.2.2 Vector Embedding Database
After knowledge-graph construction, the intermediate node
records stored in CSV format are transformed into dense
vector representations. Each node is embedded into a 384-
dimensional vector using the all-MiniLM-L6-v2 model,
which provides a balance between computational efficiency
and semantic representation quality. Each row in the node
CSV corresponds to a single graph entity and is converted
into a fixed-length embedding representation.
The resulting embeddings are stored in a vector database
to support semantic fallback retrieval. Similarity between
the embedded user query and graph-node representations
is computed using cosine similarity to identify semanti-
cally related candidate nodes. These candidates serve only
as graph anchors for query recovery and are subsequently


9
Fig. 2: Knowledge graph structure and neuro-symbolic re-
trieval workflow in GRICS.
supplied to the Cypher-generation module to regenerate an
ontology-compliant query before symbolic graph execution
resumes. Given the 384-dimensional representation, each
embedding requires approximately 1.5 KB of raw storage
in 32-bit floating-point precision, excluding database and
indexing overhead.
5.3 KG-RAG and Reasoning Pipeline
The KG-RAG pipeline extends the constructed knowledge
graph into a query-driven reasoning system for cyber–physical
threat analysis. Given a user query, the framework retrieves
relevant graph-structured evidence for downstream reasoning.
Unlike conventional Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)
approaches that rely on unstructured text retrieval, the pro-
posed method operates directly on the knowledge graph. This
enables the system to follow explicit relational paths between
entities, allowing dependencies across the cyber–physical
attack surface to be explored in a structured and interpretable
manner. The retrieved subgraph serves as grounded evidence
for downstream reasoning, ensuring that generated responses
are consistent with the underlying graph structure. This de-
sign supports reliable inference over complex attack scenarios
while maintaining traceability between retrieved evidence
and generated outputs. Figure 2 illustrates the graph-based re-
trieval and reasoning process, demonstrating how the pipeline
grounds reasoning in explicit cyber–physical relationships.
This design aligns with prior work showing that knowledge
graph integration improves relational coherence and retrieval
quality in RAG systems [10, 11, 80].
5.3.1 Information Retrieval via Symbolic & Controlled
Fallback
The symbolic retrieval process begins by translating a natural-
language cybersecurity query into an executable Cypher
query. To improve the reliability of query generation, prompt
engineering and domain adaptation are employed to constrain
the generated queries to valid node labels, relationship types,
and property names defined in the BRIDG-ICS ontology. The
generated Cypher query is subsequently executed over the
knowledge graph to retrieve graph-grounded evidence for
downstream reasoning.
A neuro-symbolic retrieval mechanism is adopted to
integrate ontology-guided symbolic reasoning with neural
language understanding. Given a user query 𝑞, a Cypher-
generating language model produces an executable query 𝑐
conditioned on the domain ontology. This symbolic query
is treated as the primary retrieval pathway, ensuring that all
retrieved evidence is grounded in the structured semantics of
the knowledge graph. Executing this query over the knowledge
graph G yields an evidence set 𝑅= EXEC(𝑐,G), where 𝑅
consists of ontology-grounded nodes, edges, and multi-hop
paths that provide interpretable and traceable evidence for
downstream reasoning.
The Cypher-generating LLM receives a structured prompt
consisting of three components: (i) a compact representation
of the BRIDG-ICS ontology schema, including node labels,
relationship types, and property definitions; (ii) explicit in-
structions requiring the model to generate only executable
Cypher statements using ontology-defined node labels, rela-
tionship types, and properties, without introducing entities
or relations outside the BRIDG-ICS schema; and (iii) the
analyst’s natural-language query. The generated Cypher query
is syntactically validated before execution over the knowledge
graph. This ontology-guided prompting strategy constrains
symbolic retrieval to valid graph structures while reducing
invalid schema references and unsupported query generation.
However, the generated query 𝑐may be unusable due to
syntactic errors, execution failures, or invalid schema refer-
ences. To ensure robustness, a controlled embedding-based
fallback mechanism is activated only when Cypher execution
fails. Let 𝑓emb : V →R𝑑denote a node embedding function.
The query 𝑞is embedded into the same space, and cosine
similarity is computed against all node embeddings. The most
relevant anchor node is selected according to Equation (2):
ˆ𝑣= arg max
𝑣′∈V cosine( 𝑓emb(𝑞), 𝑓emb(𝑣′))
(2)
which is then used to guide the regeneration of a valid
symbolic query. This design preserves interpretability while
improving robustness, aligning with recent neuro-symbolic
RAG approaches [10, 11, 23]. Consequently, the embedding-
based retrieval module does not replace symbolic graph


10
reasoning. Instead, it serves solely as a recovery mechanism
that re-establishes graph-grounded retrieval when symbolic
Cypher execution fails, ensuring that all downstream reason-
ing remains grounded in explicit knowledge graph traversal.
5.3.2 Hybrid Information Retrieval and Implementation
The proposed retrieval framework operationalizes the above
neuro-symbolic mechanism within a practical system set-
ting. While symbolic Cypher queries provide precise and
interpretable retrieval, real-world queries often vary in struc-
ture, length, and semantic focus. In particular, CVE nodes
contain heterogeneous attributes (e.g., identifier, risk score,
description, Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS)
metrics), and user queries may target any subset of these
fields, making consistent symbolic query generation challeng-
ing. In such cases, the embedding-based fallback mechanism
improves retrieval robustness by capturing semantic intent.
This is particularly effective for long or descriptive queries
that lack explicit identifiers. For example, a query such as
“What type of vulnerability allows attackers to inject malicious
scripts into web pages?” can be semantically mapped to nodes
associated with cross-site scripting (e.g., CVE-2021-XXX),
which then serve as anchors for symbolic query refinement
and subsequent multi-hop graph traversal.
Once the most relevant anchor node is identified through
embedding similarity, it is not returned directly as the final
answer. Instead, the original user query together with the
recovered graph anchor are supplied back to the Cypher gen-
eration module, which regenerates an ontology-compliant
Cypher query grounded on the identified entity while pre-
serving the user’s original reasoning intent. The regenerated
Cypher query is subsequently executed over the knowledge
graph using the same symbolic query execution pipeline as
the primary reasoning process, enabling both one-hop and
multi-hop traversal across connected cybersecurity entities.
This traversal retrieves comprehensive graph-grounded evi-
dence, including node attributes (e.g., descriptions, severity
scores, and CVSS metrics) as well as connected entities such
as weaknesses, attack techniques, and mitigations. The result-
ing subgraph serves as structured evidence for downstream
answer generation, enabling explainable analysis of vulner-
abilities, attack paths, vulnerability propagation, ATT&CK
technique attribution, and mitigation recommendations. Con-
sequently, the embedding module functions solely as a re-
covery mechanism for identifying the initial graph anchor,
while all subsequent reasoning remains grounded in explicit
symbolic graph traversal.
Cypher Prompt Engineering. To improve retrieval robust-
ness, the Cypher-generating LLM produces up to three can-
didate queries for each analyst request. Duplicate and syn-
tactically invalid queries are discarded before execution over
the labelled property graph, where cybersecurity entities
are represented as labelled nodes, relationships as typed
edges, and relevant attributes as graph properties. For lengthy
or semantically complex analyst queries, the input is de-
composed into multiple semantic segments using CONTAINS
filters, allowing relevant ontology concepts to be queried
independently while remaining within the context window of
the language model. Fine-tuning further improves the genera-
tion of ontology-compliant Cypher queries, particularly for
multi-hop reasoning involving heterogeneous cybersecurity
entities and relationships. Details of the fine-tuning proce-
dure are presented in Section 6.1. The retrieval workflow is
summarised in Algorithm 1, while the prompt segmentation
strategy is described in Algorithm 2.
Design Considerations. The hybrid framework is informed
by three key considerations: (i) token limitations, necessitat-
ing compact ontology representations; (ii) query robustness,
where embedding-based fallback compensates for failures
in symbolic query generation; and (iii) accuracy–efficiency
trade-off, balancing precise graph-based retrieval with flexible
semantic matching.
5.3.3 Two-Stage Reasoning
The reasoning process follows a two-stage KG-RAG pipeline
that separates graph-based retrieval from answer genera-
tion. In the first stage, the neuro-symbolic retrieval module
extracts a relevant subgraph from the knowledge graph, pro-
ducing an evidence set 𝑅grounded in explicit cyber–physical
relationships.
In the second stage, the retrieved subgraph, including
graph paths, node attributes, and relationship information, is
provided as structured context to a second language model
that performs only response synthesis. Unlike the Cypher-
generating LLM, this model is not fine-tuned and receives
an explicit instruction to generate responses grounded exclu-
sively on the retrieved graph evidence without introducing
unsupported external knowledge. This separation between
symbolic retrieval and natural-language generation improves
reasoning transparency while reducing hallucination, consis-
tent with prior work on knowledge-grounded reasoning in
RAG systems [13, 81].
5.4 Human–AI Collaborative Decision
The final outcome of the proposed framework is an interactive
human–AI system that enables users to query complex cyber-
physical security knowledge through natural language. Users
can submit high-level questions (e.g., related to vulnerabilities,
attack paths, or system risks), which are processed through the
hybrid retrieval and reasoning pipeline. The system integrates
symbolic graph-based reasoning with embedding-supported
retrieval to generate accurate and context-aware responses
grounded in the knowledge graph.


11
Algorithm 1 KG-RAG Retrieval with Symbolic and Embed-
ding Fallback
Require: User query 𝑞, ontology O, knowledge graph G = (V, E),
Cypher LLM LLMcypher, encoder 𝑓enc, top-𝑘parameter 𝑘
Ensure: Retrieved evidence set 𝑅for downstream answer synthesis
1: // Phase 1: Symbolic retrieval
2:
ˆ𝐶←LLMcypher(𝑞, O)
⊲Generate candidate Cypher queries
3: Deduplicate ˆ𝐶
4: for all ˆ𝑐∈ˆ𝐶do
5:
𝑅←EXEC( ˆ𝑐, G)
6:
if 𝑅≠∅then
7:
return 𝑅
8:
end if
9: end for
10: // Phase 2: Embedding-based fallback
11: z𝑞←𝑓enc(𝑞)
12: for all 𝑣𝑖∈V do
13:
z𝑖←𝑓enc(𝑣𝑖)
14:
𝑠𝑖←sim(z𝑞, z𝑖)
⊲e.g., cosine similarity
15: end for
16: V𝑘←TopK({(𝑣𝑖, 𝑠𝑖)}, 𝑘)
17: // Re-anchor symbolic retrieval
18: for all 𝑣∈V𝑘do
19:
ˆ𝑐′ ←LLMcypher(𝑞, 𝑣, O)
20:
𝑅′ ←EXEC( ˆ𝑐′, G)
21:
if 𝑅′ ≠∅then
22:
return 𝑅′
23:
end if
24: end for
25: return ∅
Algorithm 2 Prompt Segmentation and Cypher Generation
Require: User query 𝑞, ontology O, maximum segments 𝑆max, Cypher
LLM LLMcypher
Ensure: Set of Cypher queries ˆ𝐶
1: if length(𝑞) ≤token threshold then
2:
S ←{𝑞}
3: else
4:
Segment 𝑞into phrases S = {𝑠1, ..., 𝑠𝑆} with 𝑆≤𝑆max
5: end if
6: Construct prompt 𝑃using:
7:
compact ontology schema from O
8:
Cypher construction instructions
9:
segmented phrases wrapped with CONTAINS filters
10:
ˆ𝐶←LLMcypher(𝑃)
11: Deduplicate ˆ𝐶and discard syntactically invalid queries
12: return ˆ𝐶
The retrieved results are presented in an interpretable
manner, allowing users to explore relationships between vul-
nerabilities, weaknesses, and attack techniques. This supports
a range of decision-making tasks, including attack analy-
sis, vulnerability identification, and mitigation planning. By
combining structured graph reasoning with language model
capabilities, the framework facilitates explainable and effi-
cient Human–AI collaboration for cybersecurity analysis.
6 Evaluation
This section assesses GRICS in terms of benchmark per-
formance, component contributions, adversarial robustness,
runtime efficiency, and explainability. Four configurations
are compared using identical benchmark inputs and inference
settings: (i) Base KG-RAG, (ii) KG-RAG with fine-tuning
(KG-RAG+FT), (iii) KG-RAG with embedding fallback (KG-
RAG+EF), and (iv) Full GRICS. The analysis combines
CTI-Benchmark tasks with multi-hop reasoning experiments
to examine retrieval accuracy, robustness, computational per-
formance, ontology consistency, and reasoning traceability.
6.1 Experimental Setup
The experimental setup comprises the construction of the
KG-RAG question-answering dataset, the fine-tuning strategy
for the Cypher-LLM, the training configuration, and the
evaluation protocol for threat-centric retrieval and reasoning
tasks.
6.1.1 KG-RAG QA Dataset
A supervised KG-RAG question-answering (QA) dataset
was constructed to evaluate the effectiveness of the pro-
posed framework in supporting threat-centric reasoning. The
dataset was derived from 65 real-world CVEs selected from
the BRIDG-ICS knowledge graph, each associated with com-
plete CVE→CWE→CAPEC→ATT&CK mappings. From
this set, multiple query instances were generated, resulting in
a total of 450 samples aligned with the BRIDG-ICS ontology,
enabling structured and ontology-aware retrieval and reason-
ing. The dataset captures diverse cybersecurity reasoning
tasks, including: (i) inter-node relationships (e.g., CVE-CWE,
CWE-CAPEC), (ii) entity dependency reasoning, (iii) vulner-
ability and attack technique explanations, (iv) multi-hop graph
traversal and attack path discovery, (v) mitigation-oriented
queries, (vi) cross-domain IT–OT relationships, and (vii)
Vulnerability Propagation Risk (VPR) analysis.
Structural reasoning is encouraged while avoiding over-
fitting to specific identifiers through controlled paraphrasing
and identifier variation. Each CVE instance is associated
with multiple paraphrased query forms (e.g., “Which CVEs
are related to CWE-200” and “Find CVEs associated with
CWE-200”), while CVE identifiers may be modified or sub-
stituted (e.g., CVE-2024-30051) to promote generalisation.
Despite these variations, all question–answer pairs remain
explicitly grounded in the BRIDG-ICS schema, ensuring con-
sistency between natural language queries and graph-based
representations.
6.1.2 Model Training and Fine-Tuning
The Cypher generation module is implemented using a pre-
trained Llama-3.1-8B Text2Cypher model and adapted to


12
Table 2: Summary of KG-RAG QA fine-tuning dataset.
Category
Samples
CWE and CVE inter-node queries
50
Entity relations and traversal
65
Entity explanations by identifier
150
Entity explanations by name
50
Multi-hop graph traversal
100
Path dependency analysis
35
Total
450
the cybersecurity domain through parameter-efficient fine-
tuning using the Unsloth framework, which provides memory-
efficient optimisation for large language models. A total of
450 curated training samples constructed from the BRIDG-
ICS knowledge graph were used to fine-tune the Cypher-LLM
for Cypher generation and graph retrieval tasks. During infer-
ence, few-shot prompting is employed to improve syntactic
correctness and semantic consistency by constraining gener-
ated Cypher queries to valid node labels, relationship types,
and property names defined in the BRIDG-ICS ontology.
Specifically, the ontology schema is explicitly provided as
part of the prompt context, allowing the model to generate
ontology-compliant Cypher queries by adapting to the sup-
plied graph schema during inference rather than requiring
the complete ontology structure to be encoded in the model
parameters.
The Cypher-LLM is fine-tuned to enhance the translation
of natural-language cybersecurity queries into executable
Cypher statements and to align the model with domain-
specific ontology structures and query patterns. In contrast,
the Answer-LLM remains prompt-based to preserve flexibil-
ity and avoid over-specialisation to a fixed response format.
Formally, the Cypher generation process is defined by Equa-
tion (3):
ˆ𝑐= F𝜃(𝑞,O)
(3)
where 𝑞denotes the input natural-language query, O
represents the BRIDG-ICS ontology schema, F𝜃denotes the
fine-tuned Cypher generation model parameterised by 𝜃, and
ˆ𝑐is the generated executable Cypher query.
This objective encourages the generation of syntactically
valid and semantically consistent Cypher queries while reduc-
ing reliance on extensive prompt engineering. Fine-tuning
further improves robustness under incomplete graph struc-
tures by enabling alternative graph traversal strategies when
direct relationships are unavailable. Pathfinding and traversal
operations are implemented using graph data science tech-
niques, enabling efficient multi-hop reasoning and attack-path
exploration within the cybersecurity knowledge graph. The
model converged with a final training loss of 0.0052, indi-
cating stable optimisation and effective alignment between
natural-language instructions and symbolic query generation.
The complete prompt templates, fine-tuning implemen-
tation, and data generation pipeline are publicly available in
the project repository.3
Table 3: Training configuration for Cypher-LLM fine-tuning.
Parameter
Value
per device train batch size
1
gradient accumulation steps
4
num train epochs
5
learning rate
2 × 10−5
bf16
True
logging steps
40
save strategy
epoch
remove unused columns
False
gradient checkpointing
False
During inference, ontology-guided few-shot prompting
is used to improve the syntactic validity and semantic con-
sistency of generated Cypher queries. The prompt structure,
validation process, and evidence-grounded response synthesis
are described in Section 6.1.3.
6.1.3 Prompt Engineering and Inference Constraints
GRICS uses separate prompts for the Cypher-LLM and
Answer-LLM. The Cypher-LLM translates natural-language
requests into executable Cypher queries, whereas the Answer-
LLM synthesises responses from retrieved graph evidence.
The Cypher prompt includes task instructions, the relevant
BRIDG-ICS schema, few-shot examples, and the analyst
query, while restricting generated queries to the supplied
node labels, relationships, and properties and producing
up to three candidates per request. These candidates are
evaluated sequentially for syntax, ontology conformity, and
executability over the LPG, with the first valid query that
retrieves relevant evidence being selected. When symbolic
retrieval fails, embedding retrieval identifies semantically
related graph anchors, which are supplied to the Cypher-LLM
for query regeneration; the regenerated query must still pass
validation and symbolic execution.
The Answer-LLM receives the original query and the
retrieved graph evidence. Its prompt restricts response gener-
ation to the supplied entities, relationships, properties, and
graph paths, ensuring that the final output remains grounded
and traceable.
3https://github.com/ahmadspm/Resellient-Industry-5.0
--kG-Digital-Twins


13
6.1.4 Training Configuration
Fine-tuning experiments were conducted on a workstation
equipped with an NVIDIA RTX 6000 Ada Generation GPU
(48 GB VRAM). The model was trained using the Unsloth
optimisation framework with Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA)-
based adapters. The training configuration includes a sequence
length of 2048 tokens and an effective batch size of 4 achieved
via gradient accumulation. The key hyperparameters are
summarised in Table 3.
6.1.5 Benchmark Datasets and Evaluation Protocol
The proposed framework was evaluated using the publicly
available CTI-Benchmark (CTIBench) [82], which provides
standardised cybersecurity reasoning tasks for evaluating
large language models. Three benchmark tasks were selected
in this study: CTI-RCM 2024, CTI-RCM 2021, and CTI-ATE.
The CTI-RCM benchmarks evaluated the classification of
CVE descriptions into their corresponding CWE categories
using two temporal splits, while CTI-ATE evaluated the
identification of MITRE ATT&CK techniques associated
with software or malware entities.
Since CTI-Benchmark is originally designed for prompt-
based question answering, the benchmark prompts were re-
formulated into natural-language questions compatible with
the proposed KG-RAG framework. For example, a vulner-
ability classification prompt was reformulated as: “What is
the CWE associated with the CVE described as ‘...’ ?” This
reformulation enables the Cypher-LLM to translate natural-
language questions into executable Cypher queries while
preserving the original benchmark objectives. Benchmark
evaluation focuses on the Cypher generation and symbolic
graph retrieval stages of GRICS. Specifically, the bench-
mark measures whether the Cypher-LLM correctly maps the
natural-language query to the corresponding cybersecurity
entity through graph retrieval. This evaluation protocol is
appropriate because the benchmark ground truth consists of
a single structured entity (e.g., a CWE identifier or MITRE
ATT&CK technique), which is determined before response
synthesis. The subsequent Answer-LLM is responsible only
for transforming the retrieved graph evidence into a human-
readable explanation and does not alter the retrieved entity.
Consequently, benchmark performance reflects the correct-
ness of the graph-grounded retrieval and reasoning process
rather than the natural-language generation stage.
The Base KG-RAG configuration employs prompt-based
Cypher generation together with symbolic retrieval over the
BRIDG-ICS knowledge graph. The KG-RAG+FT configura-
tion additionally enables Cypher fine-tuning, KG-RAG+EF
enables the embedding-based fallback mechanism, and Full
GRICS combines both components while maintaining the
same symbolic retrieval pipeline.
Performance is evaluated using Accuracy, Precision, Re-
call, and F1-score for the CTI-Benchmark tasks. Adversarial
robustness is evaluated using Attack Success Rate (ASR) and
Tokens per Query (TPQ), while explainability is assessed
using Hallucination Rate (HR), Query Violation Rate (QVR),
and Schema Consistency Rate (SCR). Identical prompts, in-
ference settings, and evaluation metrics are maintained across
all configurations to ensure fair and reproducible comparison.
6.2 Benchmark Performance Comparison
This section evaluates the performance of GRICS on three
tasks from the CTI-Benchmark: CTI-RCM 2024, CTI-RCM
2021, and CTI-ATE. The CTI-RCM tasks evaluate the ability
of the framework to associate vulnerability descriptions with
their corresponding Common Weakness Enumeration (CWE)
categories, whereas CTI-ATE evaluates the identification of
MITRE ATT&CK techniques associated with software or
malware entities. Collectively, these tasks assess ontology-
aware entity retrieval, structured cybersecurity knowledge
reasoning, and graph-grounded threat analysis.
Table 4 presents the performance of the evaluated GRICS
configurations across the three benchmark tasks. Full GRICS
achieves the highest performance on all three datasets, ob-
taining an accuracy of 87.60% and an F1 score of 0.930 on
CTI-RCM 2024, an accuracy of 90.40% and an F1 score of
0.949 on CTI-RCM 2021, and an accuracy of 77.15% with an
F1 score of 0.871 on CTI-ATE. The results show that GRICS
performs strongly on the two vulnerability-to-weakness classi-
fication tasks, while the lower CTI-ATE performance reflects
the greater relational complexity of ATT&CK technique iden-
tification across software, malware, attack patterns, vulnera-
bilities, and techniques. Nevertheless, Full GRICS remains
effective for deeper graph traversal and heterogeneous reason-
ing. Precision is 100% across all configurations, indicating
that valid predictions retrieve the correct entity; therefore,
differences in accuracy, recall, and F1 score mainly reflect
each configuration’s ability to resolve queries and retrieve
sufficient graph-grounded evidence.
The benchmark results demonstrate that Full GRICS
performs effectively across vulnerability classification and
ATT&CK technique identification. The following ablation
study further examines the contributions of graph grounding
and the individual architectural components.
Statistical Significance. Pairwise statistical comparisons
were performed using McNemar’s test at a significance level
of 𝛼= 0.05 for each of the three benchmark tasks: CTI-RCM
2024, CTI-RCM 2021, and CTI-ATE. On each benchmark,
the published Base LLM was compared separately with Base
KG-RAG, KG-RAG+FT, KG-RAG+EF, and Full GRICS.
The results showed that Base KG-RAG significantly outper-
formed the Base LLM across CTI-RCM 2024, CTI-RCM


14
Table 4: Component-wise evaluation of GRICS on the CTI-
Benchmark.
CTI-RCM 2024
Model
Acc.
Prec.
Rec.
F1
Base KG-RAG
62.80
100
62.80
0.771
KG-RAG + FT
67.20
100
67.20
0.800
KG-RAG + EF
85.70
100
85.70
0.923
Full GRICS
87.60
100
87.60
0.930
CTI-RCM 2021
Base KG-RAG
66.50
100
66.50
0.798
KG-RAG + FT
78.60
100
78.60
0.880
KG-RAG + EF
88.20
100
88.20
0.937
Full GRICS
90.40
100
90.40
0.949
CTI-ATE
Base KG-RAG
18.33
100
18.33
0.309
KG-RAG + FT
64.72
100
64.72
0.786
KG-RAG + EF
53.33
100
53.33
0.695
Full GRICS
77.15
100
77.15
0.871
2021, and CTI-ATE (𝑝< 0.05), demonstrating the benefit
of symbolic knowledge-graph retrieval. KG-RAG+FT also
achieved statistically significant improvements over the Base
LLM on all three benchmarks (𝑝< 0.05), indicating the
contribution of domain-specific Cypher fine-tuning. Simi-
larly, KG-RAG+EF significantly outperformed the Base LLM
across the three tasks (𝑝< 0.05), highlighting the effectiveness
of embedding-assisted query recovery. Full GRICS achieved
the strongest performance and significantly outperformed
the Base LLM on CTI-RCM 2024, CTI-RCM 2021, and
CTI-ATE (𝑝< 0.05), demonstrating the combined benefit of
symbolic graph retrieval, Cypher fine-tuning, and CC BY:
Creative Commons Attribution CC BY-SA: Creative Com-
mons Attribution-ShareAlike CC BY-NC-SA: C embedding
fallback.
6.2.1 Ablation Study
The ablation study analyses the contribution of graph-grounded
symbolic retrieval, Cypher fine-tuning, and embedding-based
fallback. Since graph grounding in GRICS is realised through
symbolic Cypher execution over the BRIDG-ICS knowl-
edge graph, it cannot be removed while preserving an exe-
cutable KG-RAG configuration. Therefore, the contribution of
graph grounding is assessed by comparing the published CTI-
Benchmark LLM baseline, which operates without knowledge
graph grounding, with Base KG-RAG. It uses prompt-based
Cypher generation followed by symbolic execution over the
BRIDG-ICS knowledge graph. The difference between the
published LLM baseline and Base KG-RAG therefore repre-
sents the contribution of graph-grounded symbolic retrieval.
The remaining configurations progressively introduce Cypher
fine-tuning (KG-RAG + FT), embedding-based fallback (KG-
RAG + EF), and their combination in Full GRICS.
Figure 3 illustrates the contribution of each component
across the three benchmark tasks. Compared with the pub-
lished LLM baseline, Base KG-RAG demonstrates the benefit
of graph-grounded retrieval, while Cypher fine-tuning further
improves query validity and semantic alignment, particularly
on the more relationally complex CTI-ATE task.
The embedding-based fallback mechanism improves re-
trieval coverage when the initial Cypher query is invalid,
overly restrictive, or produces no relevant result. Importantly,
the fallback mechanism does not independently generate the
final answer or replace symbolic graph reasoning. Instead,
it identifies semantically related graph anchors and supplies
them to the Cypher generation module, which regenerates
an ontology-compliant query before symbolic execution re-
sumes.
Full GRICS achieves the strongest performance across
all three benchmark tasks, demonstrating that Cypher fine-
tuning and embedding-based fallback address complementary
limitations. Fine-tuning improves the quality of the initial
symbolic query, whereas embedding-assisted rec CC BY: Cre-
ative Commons Attribution CC BY-SA: Creative Commons
Attribution-ShareAlike CC BY-NC-SA: Covery improves
robustness when the initial retrieval attempt is unsuccess-
ful. These ablation results show that GRICS’s performance
gains stem from three complementary capabilities: explicit
knowledge graph grounding, task-specific Cypher generation,
and embedding-assisted query recovery. Comparison with
the published CTI-Benchmark LLM baseline quantifies the
impact of graph-grounded symbolic retrieval, while inter-
nal configuration comparisons isolate the added benefits of
Cypher fine-tuning and the embedding-based fallback.
Explainability Analysis. The explainability of GRICS is ex-
amined from two complementary perspectives: semantic cov-
erage and retrieval transparency. While Figure 3 demonstrates
the performance contribution of the individual architectural
components, Figures 4 and 5 provide further insight into how
these components influence the reasoning behaviour of the
framework. Figure 4 presents CWE-level prediction coverage
for the CTI-RCM 2024 and CTI-RCM 2021 benchmarks.
The Base KG-RAG configuration exhibits limited coverage
and inconsistent predictions across several CWE classes. In
contrast, KG-RAG + FT produces broader semantic cover-
age and more consistent predictions, particularly for less
frequent and semantically complex CWE categories. This
improvement indicates that fine-tuning strengthens the align-
ment between natural-language vulnerability descriptions,
generated Cypher queries, and the structured cybersecurity
concepts represented in the BRIDG-ICS knowledge graph.
Retrieval-level explainability is further analysed through the
retrieval outcome distributions shown in Figure 5. The distri-
butions distinguish queries resolved through direct symbolic
retrieval, queries recovered through the embedding-based
fallback mechanism, and unresolved queries.


15
(a) CTI-RCM 2024
(b) CTI-RCM 2021
(c) CTI-ATE
Fig. 3: Component-wise ablation of GRICS on the CTI-Benchmark datasets. The published CTI-Benchmark LLM baseline
represents prediction without knowledge graph grounding. Base KG-RAG employs prompt-based Cypher generation and
symbolic graph retrieval, +FT enables Cypher fine-tuning, +EF enables the embedding-based fallback mechanism, and Full
GRICS combines both enhancements.
(a) CTI-RCM 2024 Base KG-RAG
(b) CTI-RCM 2024 KG-RAG + FT
(c) CTI-RCM 2021 Base KG-RAG
(d) CTI-RCM 2021 KG-RAG + FT
Fig. 4: Heatmap comparison of predictive accuracy across
the top 15 CWE classes for CTI-RCM 2024 and CTI-RCM
2021.
The fine-tuned configurations resolve a larger proportion
of queries through direct symbolic reasoning and produce
fewer unresolved outcomes. This behaviour improves reason-
ing traceability because more predictions can be associated
with an explicit Cypher query and a corresponding graph
traversal path. The embedding-based fallback mechanism pro-
vides an additional recovery path when the initial symbolic
query is unsuccessful, but the final result remains grounded
in symbolic graph execution because the retrieved semantic
anchor is used to regenerate an ontology-compliant Cypher
query. These results show that the architectural enhancements
improve more than predictive performance. Cypher fine-
tuning increases semantic coverage and the share of queries
resolved by direct graph traversal, while embedding-assisted
recovery reduces unresolved cases without replacing sym-
bolic reasoning. GRICS thus offers an interpretable reasoning
pipeline where retrieved evidence is traced to explicit entities
and relationships in the BRIDG-ICS knowledge graph.
Semantic Stability of GE Embeddings. The semantic stabil-
ity of the graph embeddings used by the fallback mechanism
is evaluated when the initial symbolic retrieval attempt is
unsuccessful. Semantic stability refers to the consistency
of similarity-based candidate rankings and the preservation
of meaningful neighbourhood structures in the embedding
space. All graph-node and query embeddings were generated
using the CTI-RCM model. Three complementary analy-
ses are conducted: similarity-score decay across retrieval
ranks, similarity margins between the two highest-ranked
candidates, and a two-dimensional principal component anal-
ysis (PCA) projection. These analyses respectively examine
rank-based relevance decay, candidate separation, and local
neighbourhood structure.
Figure 6a shows a clear decline in cosine similarity across
retrieval ranks, based on 20 queries from each of the CTI-
RCM 2021 and CTI-RCM 2024 datasets, indicating that
the embedding model consistently prioritises a small set
of semantically relevant graph entities. Figure 6b further
evaluates candidate separation using the margin Δ = 𝑠top1 −
𝑠top2, where smaller margins for CTI-RCM 2021 indicate
greater ambiguity between the highest-ranked candidates,
while larger margins for CTI-RCM 2024 suggest stronger
separation and more reliable graph-anchor selection.
The PCA projection in Figure 6c provides a qualitative rep-
resentation of the embedding neighbourhood for CTI-RCM
2024. The query embedding appears near its highest-ranked
graph nodes and forms a coherent local cluster with semanti-
cally relevant entities. Although PCA does not preserve exact
distances from the original high-dimensional space, the ob-
served clustering provides qualitative evidence that relevant
graph nodes occupy a similar semantic neighbourhood to the
query. The apparent proximity of some background nodes in
the PCA projection does not contradict the retrieval rankings
because candidate selection is performed using cosine simi-
larity in the original embedding space rather than Euclidean
distance in the two-dimensional projection.


16
(a) CTI-RCM 2024
(b) CTI-RCM 2021
(c) CTI-ATE
Fig. 5: Retrieval outcome distributions across the CTI-RCM 2024, CTI-RCM 2021, and CTI-ATE benchmarks, showing
symbolic-only retrievals, embedding-assisted fallback retrievals, and unresolved queries for the evaluated GRICS configurations.
(a) Similarity decay across retrieval rank.
(b) Similarity margin in embedding-based fall-
back retrieval.
(c) PCA projection of GE embeddings.
Fig. 6: Semantic stability analysis of the graph embeddings used by the GRICS fallback retrieval mechanism.
Based on the observed similarity decay and candidate-
margin separation, fallback retrieval in GRICS is restricted
to the three highest-ranked graph nodes. The results indicate
diminishing semantic relevance beyond these candidates.
Limiting retrieval to the top three nodes therefore reduces
the introduction of noisy graph anchors while preserving the
candidates most likely to support successful ontology-aware
Cypher regeneration.
6.3 Robustness Against Adversarial Attacks
Evaluating the robustness of KG-RAG systems against adver-
sarial attacks remains challenging due to the absence of stan-
dardised benchmarks and the diversity of knowledge graph
structures, ontology designs, and reasoning tasks adopted
across existing studies. To assess the robustness of GRICS, we
follow the evaluation methodology of [56] and adopt Attack
Success Rate (ASR) as the primary evaluation metric.For
untargeted attacks, Attack Success Rate (ASR) is computed
using Equation (4):
ASR =
Í
(𝑥,𝑦)∈𝑋⊮ˆ𝑦≠𝑦
|𝑋|
.
(4)
where 𝑋denotes the set of evaluation queries, 𝑦is the
ground-truth answer, ˆ𝑦is the model prediction under adver-
sarial perturbation, and ⊮(·) is the indicator function that
returns 1 when the attack successfully changes the prediction
and 0 otherwise. A lower ASR indicates greater robustness,
as fewer adversarial attacks successfully alter the model’s
prediction.
Tokens per Query (TPQ) is computed according to Equa-
tion (5):
TPQ = #tokens in 𝐷poison
|𝑋|
.
(5)
where 𝐷poison represents the injected adversarial content
and |𝑋| is the number of evaluated queries. TPQ measures
the average number of adversarial tokens injected per query.
Larger TPQ values indicate that an attacker must inject more
adversarial content to influence the retrieval process, whereas
lower TPQ values indicate that successful attacks require
fewer injected tokens.
Following the experimental methodology of [83], a total
of 120 representative multi-hop reasoning queries were evalu-
ated over the BRIDG-ICS ontology. To improve comparability
with PoisonRAG and GRAPPOISON, the robustness eval-
uation was restricted to ATT&CK-oriented reasoning tasks
involving malware, ATT&CK techniques, and mitigation re-
lationships, reflecting the common evaluation scope adopted
in prior graph-poisoning studies. Each query was subjected
to adversarial perturbations following the prompt-injection
strategy described in [56].


17
The perturbations were grouped into lexical and seman-
tic attack categories to assess whether different forms of
input manipulation affect GRICS differently. Lexical attacks
modify the surface form of the query through token- or phrase-
level changes intended to influence query interpretation. Ex-
amples include inserting misleading keywords, replacing
entity-related terms, or modifying local phrasing around an
ATT&CK technique or mitigation entity. Semantic attacks
instead modify the contextual meaning or instruction struc-
ture of the query while preserving the original cybersecurity
reasoning target. For example, a semantic perturbation may
introduce conflicting instructions or misleading contextual
statements intended to redirect the model toward an incorrect
ATT&CK technique, mitigation, or graph relationship despite
the underlying query objective. These two categories there-
fore capture complementary adversarial behaviours: lexical
attacks target surface-level interpretation, whereas semantic
attacks attempt to manipulate the higher-level reasoning intent
of the generated query.
Category-specific robustness was measured using Attack
Success Rate (ASR). GRICS achieved an ASR of approx-
imately 68.3% under lexical adversarial perturbations and
74.9% under semantic adversarial perturbations, yielding an
aggregate ASR of 71.6% across the complete adversarial
evaluation set. The higher ASR observed under semantic per-
turbations indicates that context-level manipulation presents a
greater challenge to the reasoning pipeline than surface-level
lexical modification. Tokens per Query (TPQ) was addition-
ally used to characterize the amount of adversarial content
required during the aggregate attack evaluation.
For broader context, Table 5 reports the robustness re-
sults of GRICS alongside representative PoisonRAG and
GRAPPOISON results reproduced from [56]. Because these
approaches were evaluated using different knowledge graphs,
graph-construction procedures, adversarial implementations,
and evaluation protocols, the comparison is intended to pro-
vide qualitative context rather than a controlled head-to-head
assessment. Although the robustness evaluation of GRICS
was restricted to an ATT&CK-oriented reasoning scope to
better align with prior studies, the underlying BRIDG-ICS
knowledge graph differs from the knowledge graphs used by
PoisonRAG and GRAPPOISON in terms of ontology design,
graph construction, and relational structure. Consequently, the
reported ASR and TPQ values should be interpreted as pro-
viding qualitative insight into the robustness characteristics
of graph-grounded retrieval systems rather than establishing
direct quantitative superiority. A controlled comparison using
identical knowledge graphs, attack settings, and evaluation
protocols remains an important direction for future work.
Table 5: Qualitative comparison of adversarial robustness.
Results for PoisonRAG and GRAPPOISON are reproduced
from [56] and were obtained under different knowledge
graphs, reasoning tasks, and attack settings.
Method
ASR (%)
TPQ
PoisonRAG
63.2
184.50
GRAPPOISON
96.9
103.80
GRICS
71.6
96.72
6.3.1 Robustness to Noisy Analyst Inputs
In addition to intentional adversarial manipulation, practical
cyber-threat intelligence systems must tolerate non-malicious
imperfections in analyst queries. Such inputs may contain
spelling errors, incomplete grammatical structures, or incon-
sistent formatting of cybersecurity identifiers while preserving
the same underlying analytical intent. The noisy-input analy-
sis therefore considers two settings: natural-language noise,
combining typographical and grammatical perturbations, and
entity-format noise. Unlike the adversarial perturbations eval-
uated in the previous subsection, these modifications are not
intended to redirect the reasoning process toward an incorrect
answer, but instead simulate realistic imperfections that may
occur during analyst interaction.
For typographical and grammatical noise, the CTI-RCM
2024 benchmark was selected because its vulnerability de-
scriptions contain substantial natural-language context, mak-
ing it suitable for evaluating robustness when the linguistic
formulation of a query is degraded. The perturbations intro-
duce spelling errors, character-level modifications, omitted
words, and grammatically incomplete or irregular sentence
structures while preserving the original cybersecurity reason-
ing target. For example, a correctly formulated vulnerability-
related query may be modified through misspelled security
terminology or fragmented grammatical structure without
changing the expected CWE classification.
Table 6 reports the performance of the evaluated configu-
rations under these combined natural-language perturbations.
Base KG-RAG achieved an accuracy of 46.3%, and the ad-
dition of fine-tuning alone resulted in the same accuracy
of 46.3%. This behaviour can be explained by the fact that
fine-tuning improves the model’s ability to generate ontology-
compliant Cypher queries, but it does not correct incorrect
or corrupted information contained in the input itself. Con-
sequently, when typographical or grammatical perturbations
distort the entity or relation expressed in the query, the gener-
ated Cypher statement may still be structurally valid while
referring to an entity or pattern that does not exist in the
knowledge graph, resulting in an empty or incorrect retrieval.
KG-RAG+EF achieved an accuracy of 82.7%, while Full
GRICS achieved a similar accuracy of 83.8%. The substan-
tial improvement over the configurations without embedding


18
fallback indicates that semantic graph-anchor recovery is
the primary mechanism responsible for robustness under
noisy-input conditions. When typographical or grammatical
perturbations prevent the initial symbolic query from reliably
identifying the intended graph entity, the embedding mecha-
nism can recover a semantically related anchor, after which
an ontology-compliant Cypher query is regenerated and sym-
bolic retrieval resumes. The small performance difference
between KG-RAG+EF and Full GRICS is associated with
cases involving omitted words or fragmented phrasing, where
the fine-tuned Cypher-LLM may generate a more suitable
alternative interpretation or select a more informative query
phrase from the remaining context. In some instances, this
can help Full GRICS recover a valid symbolic query that KG-
RAG+EF does not produce. However, because this effect is
limited and may depend on the model’s generation behaviour,
both configurations exhibit broadly comparable robustness,
with embedding-assisted recovery remaining the dominant
mechanism under noisy-input conditions.
Table 6: Robustness to combined typographical and gram-
matical noise on the CTI-RCM 2024 benchmark.
Configuration
Accuracy (%)
Base KG-RAG
46.3
KG-RAG + FT
46.3
KG-RAG + EF
82.7
Full GRICS
83.8
Meanwhile, entity-format noise was evaluated separately
using the one-hop question set employed in both the runtime
analysis (Section 6.4) and the explainability and traceability
analysis (Section 6.5). This setting examines cases in which
a cybersecurity identifier or entity name is expressed using a
non-canonical format, including omitted separators, spacing
variations, capitalization differences, or minor textual errors.
For entity-format perturbations, Base KG-RAG and KG-
RAG+FT achieved 0% successful resolution, whereas KG-
RAG+EF and Full GRICS correctly resolved 100% of the
evaluated one- to three-hop queries when the intended identi-
fier remained recoverable through semantic similarity. This
difference arises because the entity identifier frequently serves
as the principal matching term in the Cypher WHERE clause.
When the identifier is malformed or expressed in a non-
canonical format, Base KG-RAG and KG-RAG+FT cannot
recover the corresponding graph entity and therefore fail to
return relevant results. In contrast, configurations equipped
with embedding fallback can identify the semantically closest
graph entity, use it as an anchor, and regenerate an ontology-
compliant Cypher query before symbolic execution resumes.
The recovered embedding candidate is therefore used only
to reconstruct the query and is not accepted directly as fi-
nal evidence. For reasoning paths beyond three hops, the
increased relational complexity may lead to incomplete or
hallucinated query structures; this behaviour is examined
further in Section 6.5.
A different behaviour occurs when the numerical com-
ponent of an identifier is modified. Changing the numeric
portion of a CVE, CWE, CAPEC, or similar identifier may re-
fer to a different valid cybersecurity entity rather than merely
representing formatting noise. In this situation, GRICS does
not assume that the altered identifier corresponds to the
originally intended entity and may therefore return informa-
tion associated with the identifier actually supplied in the
query. This distinction prevents semantic fallback from incor-
rectly overriding potentially valid cybersecurity identifiers.
These findings confirm that embedding-assisted recovery is
the main mechanism supporting GRICS robustness to noisy
natural-language and non-canonical entity inputs.
6.3.2 Uncertainty-Aware Graph Reasoning
In practice, complete deterministic mappings are not always
available across the vulnerability-to-MITRE ATT&CK rea-
soning chain. For example, not every CVE is associated with
a CWE, not every CWE is linked to a CAPEC attack pat-
tern, and not every CAPEC entry has a complete mapping
to a MITRE ATT&CK technique. As a result, a multi-hop
reasoning path may become incomplete even though other
potentially relevant associations are available.
The BRIDG-ICS ontology addresses this limitation by
explicitly preserving candidate associations through rela-
tionship types such as HAS_POSSIBLE_[NODE_NAME] [23].
These relations represent potentially relevant mappings when
a definitive relationship is unavailable. In this way, incom-
plete mappings are handled within the ontology itself rather
than requiring the reasoning framework to infer unsupported
relationships.
GRICS incorporates these uncertainty-aware relation-
ships directly into its multi-hop reasoning process. When a
query traverses the CVE–CWE–CAPEC–MITRE ATT&CK
chain, the generated Cypher queries can retrieve both defini-
tive relationships and corresponding HAS_POSSIBLE_* re-
lationships when they are represented in the graph. For
example, if a CVE does not have a definitive CWE mapping
but is connected through HAS_POSSIBLE_CWE, the associated
possible CWE entities can still be returned as part of the
graph-grounded evidence. Because GRICS generates mul-
tiple ontology-compliant Cypher candidates, different valid
relationship patterns can be explored within the same analyst
request.
The embedding-fallback mechanism further supports this
process when the initial query cannot reliably identify the
intended graph anchor. Once a relevant graph entity is re-
covered, GRICS regenerates an ontology-compliant Cypher
query and retrieves the available direct and possible relation-


19
ships associated with that entity. Importantly, the embedding
mechanism is used only to recover a relevant graph anchor;
it does not create or infer a missing relationship. The final
evidence remains restricted to relationships explicitly repre-
sented in BRIDG-ICS. Robustness to incomplete mappings
is therefore supported through the framework’s ability to
preserve and expose ontology-defined possible relationships
during normal multi-hop retrieval. These possible associa-
tions remain explicitly identified by their relationship types
and are not presented as confirmed mappings.
The practical purpose of this mechanism is to support an-
alysts when a complete reasoning path is unavailable. Rather
than terminating the investigation at the first missing de-
terministic mapping or requiring the analyst to restart the
analysis from the original vulnerability, GRICS can expose
the available candidate relationships and related entities. This
allows the analyst to continue investigating relevant weak-
nesses, attack patterns, and MITRE ATT&CK techniques
while retaining visibility of which relationships are confirmed
and which remain possible.
6.4 Runtime Performance Analysis
In addition to reasoning accuracy, the practical deployment
of GRICS depends on its computational efficiency for real-
world cyber threat investigations. Runtime performance was
evaluated using 100 representative queries sampled from
the evaluation datasets, comprising 20 entity lookup queries,
20 one-hop graph traversal queries, 40 multi-hop reasoning
queries (covering both two-to-three-hop and four-to-five-hop
reasoning), and 20 CTI-Benchmark queries.
The runtime analysis separately measures the latency of
the three principal stages of the inference pipeline: (i) Cypher
query generation, (ii) symbolic graph retrieval, and (iii)
natural-language response synthesis. Timing measurements
were performed using Python’s time.perf_counter() af-
ter all models had been loaded into GPU memory and initial-
ized. Consequently, the reported latency represents steady-
state online inference and excludes one-time model loading
and initialization overhead.
Table 7 summarizes the average latency for Cypher gen-
eration and symbolic graph retrieval across representative
cybersecurity reasoning tasks. Entity lookup exhibits the low-
est latency because queries are anchored to indexed entities,
enabling efficient Cypher generation and localized graph
traversal. As reasoning depth increases, both Cypher genera-
tion and symbolic retrieval require additional processing time
due to increasingly complex graph traversal. Attack path anal-
ysis incurs the highest retrieval latency because substantially
larger graph neighbourhoods must be explored.
In practice, runtime is dominated by the two LLM infer-
ence stages rather than graph retrieval. Depending on query
Table 7: Average latency across representative cybersecurity
reasoning tasks.
Query Category
Cypher (s)
Query Exec. (s)
Entity lookup
0.86
0.82
One-hop reasoning
1.39
0.67
Multi-hop (2–3 hops)
1.61
0.96
Multi-hop (4–5 hops)
1.94
1.42
CTI-Benchmark
2.32
1.87
Attack path analysis
2.58
6.42
LLM response synthesis
1.46
–
complexity, Cypher generation requires between 0.86 and
2.58 seconds, while response synthesis requires approximately
1.46 seconds on average. Symbolic graph retrieval contributes
comparatively little overhead for most query types, and the
embedding-based fallback mechanism introduces only min-
imal additional latency because semantic similarity search
is performed over precomputed node embeddings and is
activated only when symbolic retrieval fails.
Although the current evaluation was conducted on the
BRIDG-ICS knowledge graph, the architecture is designed
to support larger industrial knowledge graphs, although its
performance at substantially greater scale remains to be empir-
ically validated. Symbolic retrieval performs localized graph
traversal anchored by identified entities rather than exhaustive
graph exploration, making query execution dependent primar-
ily on reasoning depth and the retrieved subgraph rather than
the total graph size. Furthermore, node embeddings are gener-
ated offline and reused during inference, allowing embedding-
based retrieval to scale independently of LLM inference.
Future deployments on million-scale knowledge graphs could
further benefit from approximate nearest-neighbour indexing
and distributed graph databases.
Table 8 summarizes the steady-state runtime memory
utilisation after model initialization. The majority of GPU
memory is occupied by the fine-tuned Llama-3.1-8B model,
whereas the Neo4j knowledge graph and precomputed node
embeddings reside in host memory. Since node embeddings
are generated offline, embedding-based retrieval introduces
only a modest memory overhead while enabling efficient
semantic retrieval.
GRICS introduces an additional LLM inference stage for
ontology-aware Cypher generation before response synthesis.
This increases inference cost and latency, but the additional
computation enables the analyst query to be converted into
an executable symbolic graph query prior to answer gen-
eration. The resulting trade-off is therefore between lower
computational overhead and stronger ontology compliance,
graph-grounded verification, and evidence traceability.


20
Table 8: Runtime memory utilisation of GRICS.
Component
Runtime Memory
Llama-3.1-8B (4-bit)
∼6.3 GB GPU
Embedding model (MiniLM-L6-v2)
<100 MB
Neo4j knowledge graph
1.9 GB Host RAM
Node embeddings (precomputed)
∼45 MB RAM
6.4.1 Computational Complexity and Scalability
The computational cost of GRICS can be considered across
four principal components: Cypher generation, symbolic
graph retrieval, embedding-assisted fallback retrieval, and
natural-language response generation. Let 𝑁= |V| denote
the number of nodes in the knowledge graph, 𝑑the embed-
ding dimensionality, and ℎthe reasoning depth of the graph
query. The two LLM-based stages, Cypher generation and
response synthesis, are primarily influenced by model size
and input/output sequence length and remain the dominant
contributors to inference latency, as reflected in the runtime
measurements reported above.
For symbolic retrieval, GRICS does not perform exhaus-
tive traversal of the complete knowledge graph for each
request. Generated Cypher queries are anchored to identi-
fied cybersecurity entities and retrieve only the relationships
required by the requested reasoning path. Consequently, prac-
tical graph-query cost is influenced mainly by the size and
density of the local neighbourhood, relationship branching
factor, and reasoning depth ℎ, rather than by direct traversal
of all 𝑁graph nodes. As the knowledge graph grows, retrieval
latency is therefore expected to depend on whether the addi-
tional entities and relationships increase the neighbourhood
explored by a particular query. This behaviour is reflected
in the current runtime results, where deeper multi-hop and
attack-path queries exhibit greater retrieval latency because
larger relational neighbourhoods are traversed.
The embedding-assisted fallback mechanism introduces a
separate scalability consideration. Node embeddings are gen-
erated offline and reused during inference, avoiding repeated
embedding computation during normal query processing. For
𝑁graph entities represented by 𝑑-dimensional embeddings,
direct similarity comparison has an approximate computa-
tional cost of 𝑂(𝑁𝑑). As the graph grows, more efficient
vector-retrieval mechanisms may therefore be required to pre-
vent semantic fallback latency from increasing proportionally
with the number of embedded entities.
Embedding regeneration also introduces an offline com-
putational cost as the knowledge graph evolves. A complete
regeneration requires embedding the textual representation
of each graph entity and therefore increases approximately
with the number of entities being processed. However, routine
graph updates do not necessarily require regeneration of the
complete embedding collection; newly introduced or modi-
fied entities can be embedded separately while unchanged
representations are retained. Consequently, embedding main-
tenance primarily affects offline graph-update operations
rather than the latency of every analyst query.
Memory requirements similarly increase with knowledge-
graph size. In the current implementation, the knowledge
graph occupies approximately 1.9 GB of host memory and the
precomputed node embeddings approximately 45 MB, while
the dominant GPU-memory requirement is the 4-bit Llama-
3.1-8B model at approximately 6.3 GB, as reported in Table 8.
For a fixed embedding dimensionality, embedding storage
grows approximately linearly with the number of embedded
entities. Knowledge-graph storage also increases with both
the number of entities and relationships, with relationship
density becoming particularly relevant for multi-hop retrieval.
These observations suggest that increasing graph scale
primarily affects the graph and vector-retrieval layers, whereas
the memory required by the LLM remains largely indepen-
dent of the number of graph entities. The current evaluation
provides the measured computational baseline for BRIDG-
ICS; substantially larger industrial knowledge graphs would
require further empirical evaluation to determine the prac-
tical latency and memory behaviour under enterprise-scale
workloads.
6.5 Explainability and Reasoning Traceability
Explainability in GRICS is evaluated from both quantitative
and operational perspectives. The quantitative evaluation
measures whether generated Cypher queries remain grounded
in the BRIDG-ICS ontology, comply with query-generation
constraints, and preserve structural validity as relational
complexity increases. The operational evaluation examines
whether the resulting reasoning paths can be inspected and
verified by security analysts.
GRICS supports traceability through explicit multi-hop
reasoning chains grounded in verifiable knowledge-graph
entities and relationships. Rather than producing unsupported
conclusions, the framework exposes the generated Cypher
queries, retrieved entities, and traversed relationships as-
sociated with each result. This design allows analysts to
inspect intermediate reasoning steps, verify the supporting
evidence, and contextualize model outputs within operational
Industry 5.0 security workflows.
6.5.1 Quantitative Explainability Metrics
Quantitative explainability is evaluated using a structured
query corpus derived from the KG-RAG question-answering
dataset described in Section 6.1.1. The corpus enables system-
atic analysis of structural validity and reasoning behaviour
across multi-hop queries. In particular, the evaluation ex-
amines whether generated queries remain grounded in the


21
Table 9: Quantitative explainability metrics across reasoning
hop depth.
Baseline
Fine-Tuned
Hop
HR
QVR
SCR
HR
QVR
SCR
1-Hop
0.35
0.20
0.82
0.15
0.10
0.93
2-Hop
0.45
0.28
0.76
0.22
0.15
0.84
3-Hop
0.58
0.40
0.53
0.30
0.22
0.67
4-Hop
0.78
0.60
0.25
0.45
0.35
0.55
5-Hop
1.00
0.80
0.00
0.70
0.50
0.35
ontology and comply with query-generation instructions as
relational complexity increases.
Three log-derived indicators are used: Hallucination Rate
(HR), Query Violation Rate (QVR), and Schema Consis-
tency Rate (SCR). These metrics capture complementary
aspects of model behaviour, including grounding reliability,
instruction adherence, and ontology conformity. HR, defined
in Equation 6, measures the proportion of generated queries
containing fabricated entities, relationships, properties, or
identifiers that are unsupported by the BRIDG-ICS ontology:
HR = 𝑁hall
𝑁gen
,
(6)
where 𝑁hall denotes the number of hallucinated queries
and 𝑁gen denotes the total number of generated queries. Query
Violation Rate (QVR), defined in Equation 7, measures the
proportion of evaluation runs in which the model violates the
three-query generation constraint:
QVR = 𝑁viol
𝑁runs
,
(7)
where 𝑁viol is the number of runs that violate the query-
generation constraint and 𝑁runs is the total number of eval-
uation runs. Schema Consistency Rate (SCR), defined in
Equation 8, measures the proportion of generated queries that
use valid ontology entities, relationship types, and properties:
SCR = 𝑁valid
𝑁gen
,
(8)
where 𝑁valid denotes the number of ontology-aligned
queries. Lower HR and QVR values, together with a higher
SCR value, indicate stronger grounding, improved structural
control, and greater explainability.
Table 9 summarizes explainability performance across
one- to five-hop reasoning. Both models exhibit compara-
tively stable behaviour on shallow queries, while structural
degradation becomes increasingly evident beyond three hops.
As relational depth increases, HR and QVR increase while
SCR decreases, reflecting the growing difficulty of maintain-
ing valid graph structure, ontology alignment, and query-
generation constraints.
Despite this degradation, the fine-tuned model consis-
tently outperforms the baseline at every reasoning depth.
For one-hop queries, fine-tuning reduces HR from 0.35 to
0.15 and increases SCR from 0.82 to 0.93. This indicates
that fine-tuning improves structural reliability even when the
required graph traversal is relatively simple. The performance
difference becomes more pronounced as relational complexity
increases. At four hops, fine-tuning reduces HR from 0.78 to
0.45 and QVR from 0.60 to 0.35, while increasing SCR from
0.25 to 0.55. At five hops, the baseline exhibits complete
structural failure, with an HR of 1.00 and an SCR of 0.00.
In contrast, the fine-tuned model retains partial structural
validity, obtaining an HR of 0.70 and an SCR of 0.35. Fine-
tuning markedly improves ontology conformity, instruction
adherence, and grounding reliability as relational complexity
increases. While performance drops for both models at deeper
hop levels, the fine-tuned model declines more slowly and
retains more structurally interpretable queries.
6.5.2 Reasoning Completeness Across Hop Depth
The effect of relational depth on reasoning completeness
is analyzed across increasing hop complexity within the
BRIDG-ICS ontology using the same 450-query evaluation
corpus. A query is considered successful when the model
generates a correct and executable Cypher query that retrieves
the intended graph path.
In the baseline model, the three generated query alter-
natives frequently contain mismatched identifiers, invalid
relationships, or repetitive query patterns. These errors result
in incomplete or non-executable graph traversals. In con-
trast, the fine-tuned model produces more structurally coher-
ent alternatives using ontology-defined relationships such as
HAS_POSSIBLE_CWE and HAS_POSSIBLE_TECHNIQUE. Con-
sequently, alternative queries remain semantically grounded
even when the first generated query is unsuccessful. As shown
in Figure 7a, both models perform comparatively well on one-
to three-hop queries, where the required relational chains
remain relatively shallow. Structural difficulty becomes more
apparent at four hops, where the model may need to recon-
struct a complete relation chain such as
CVE →CWE →CAPEC →Technique.
(9)
At this depth, the baseline exhibits increasing instability,
whereas the fine-tuned model maintains stronger performance
by using domain-adapted representations and ontology-aware
relationship patterns learned during fine-tuning. These pat-
terns support more coherent reconstruction of multi-layer
graph traversals, including paths that span both information
technology and operational technology entities. The diver-
gence is most pronounced at four- and five-hop depths, where
relational complexity increases substantially. At five hops, the


22
baseline frequently fails to reconstruct complete multi-layer
paths. As illustrated in Figure 7b, the fine-tuned model re-
covers complete paths of four or more hops in approximately
62% of cases, compared with 22% for the baseline.
These findings indicate that shallow reasoning involving
one to three hops remains manageable for both models. How-
ever, fine-tuning substantially improves structural continuity
and reasoning completeness for deeper four- and five-hop
queries.
6.5.3 Structural Stability and Retrieval behaviour
Structural robustness under multi-query generation is eval-
uated through query-constraint adherence, reasoning com-
pleteness, retrieval behaviour, and error characteristics. These
complementary analyses are summarised in Figure 8.
Query Violation Rate provides an initial measure of
structural control, as shown in Figure 8a. The baseline fre-
quently exceeds the three-query constraint, particularly as
relational complexity increases. In contrast, the fine-tuned
model demonstrates stronger instruction adherence and more
consistently generates query alternatives within the permitted
boundary. This result indicates improved regulation of query
generation under constrained reasoning conditions.
Reasoning completeness is further evaluated through
complete-path recovery for multi-hop queries in Figure 8b,
where the fine-tuned model achieves a substantially higher
recovery rate than the baseline, indicating improved structural
control and reasoning continuity. As shown in Figure 8c, it also
resolves more queries through direct symbolic graph traversal,
whereas the baseline relies more heavily on embedding-based
fallback and produces more unresolved cases. Direct symbolic
traversal improves traceability by producing explicit and
verifiable reasoning paths through the BRIDG-ICS ontology.
Although fallback retrieval supports recovery when the initial
Cypher query fails, it may introduce ambiguity when multiple
graph nodes have similar semantic relevance; however, the
retrieved anchors are used only to regenerate an ontology-
compliant Cypher query before symbolic graph execution
resumes.
Error-type composition provides further insight into
model behaviour, as shown in Figure 8d. Baseline failures
are predominantly compound errors that combine incorrect
relationship targets with fabricated or mismatched node identi-
fiers. The fine-tuned model produces fewer compound errors
and generates outputs that remain more structurally inter-
pretable, even when the retrieved path is incorrect. These
results indicate that fine-tuning improves query-generation
stability, adherence to structural constraints, reasoning con-
tinuity, and reliance on direct symbolic grounding. These
improvements strengthen explainability by ensuring that a
larger proportion of model outputs can be traced to explicit
ontology entities, relationships, and executable graph paths.
Together, the quantitative metrics and behavioural analy-
ses show that fine-tuning improves both GRICS performance
and interpretability. Lower hallucination and query-violation
rates indicate stronger grounding and instruction adherence,
while higher schema consistency and complete-path recovery
reflect better ontology alignment and reasoning continuity.
For analysts, these gains yield more transparent, verifiable out-
puts: generated Cypher queries reveal the relationships used
in reasoning, retrieved graph paths provide explicit evidence,
and error categories remain structurally interpretable. GRICS
thus enables explainable cyber-threat reasoning by combin-
ing measurable structural reliability with evidence-linked
reasoning traceability.
6.6 Use Cases
This section presents representative use cases that demonstrate
how GRICS performs multi-hop reasoning over heteroge-
neous cybersecurity knowledge graphs integrating MITRE
ATT&CK, NVD vulnerability data, CAPEC attack patterns,
and industrial asset information. The selected examples are
organized to reflect four core analytical capabilities of the
framework: identifying attack paths across industrial assets,
analysing vulnerability-specific evidence, attributing adversar-
ial techniques through structured threat-intelligence relations,
and deriving mitigations across interconnected semantic lay-
ers. In this way, the section shows how GRICS unifies asset-
level, vulnerability-level, threat-level, and mitigation-level
reasoning within a single graph-grounded framework for
Industry 5.0 cybersecurity analysis.
Attack Path Reasoning. We first consider a multi-hop at-
tack scenario within an industrial control system. Given
the query “Show path between MQTT_BROKER_1 and
SAFETY_PLC_2”, GRICS automatically generates an exe-
cutable Cypher query to retrieve valid graph paths between
the specified assets. The resulting paths represent potential
communication or attack routes formed by interconnected
components, including brokers, runtime servers, conveyors,
and PLCs. The path length reflects reasoning depth, cap-
turing direct and indirect dependencies across network and
operational layers. Retrieved paths depend on the underlying
infrastructure; differences in topology, device configuration,
segmentation policies, and Industry 5.0 architectures can
yield different reasoning outcomes. These paths are then sum-
marised in natural language, and context-aware mitigation
recommendations are generated to support cyber–physical
risk assessment.
Vulnerability-Centric Analysis. Beyond asset connectivity,
GRICS supports vulnerability-focused reasoning through
structured graph retrieval. As shown in Figure 10, a query
for CVE-2025-9492 retrieves associated attributes such as
CVSS severity scores, exploitability metrics, and linked CWE
classifications. These elements are synthesized into a concise


23
(a) Multi-hop success rate across one- to five-hop queries originating
from CVE entities.
(b) Hallucination rate across four- and five-hop queries.
Fig. 7: Reasoning completeness and structural stability under increasing multi-hop complexity.
(a) Query violation rate.
(b) Complete-path recovery for
queries requiring four or more
hops.
(c) Retrieval-mode distribution.
(d) Error-type composition.
Fig. 8: Structural stability, retrieval behaviour, and error characteristics under multi-query generation across increasing hop
depth.
technical description of the vulnerability’s impact. To ensure
correctness, precision, and traceability, the retrieved informa-
tion is aligned with the official CVE record4, demonstrating
consistency with authoritative vulnerability data sources.
Based on this validated knowledge, the system derives mitiga-
tion guidance, including patch deployment, input validation,
and secure configuration practices.
Adversarial Technique Attribution. GRICS further enables
adversarial behaviour analysis within the MITRE ATT&CK
domain. For the query “Which technique is used by group
Cleaver via malware TinyZBot?”, the framework performs
multi-hop traversal across Group Malware–Technique rela-
tionships in the knowledge graph.
As illustrated in Figure 11, the proposed framework iden-
tifies the relevant malware entity and its associated MITRE
ATT&CK techniques through structured graph traversal. The
retrieved techniques are subsequently synthesized into a
human-readable explanation, describing their operational
intent and corresponding defensive considerations. The iden-
tified malware entity and its associated ATT&CK techniques
are consistent with the official MITRE ATT&CK knowledge
4http://cve.org/CVERecord?id=CVE-2025-9492
base, demonstrating the correctness of the graph-grounded
reasoning process. This consistency is validated against the
official MITRE ATT&CK software entry for TinyZBot5.
Mitigation Derivation Across Abstraction Layers. GRICS
derives solution-oriented mitigation strategies through multi-
hop traversal across CVE, CWE, CAPEC, ATT&CK, and
mitigation entities. As shown in Figure 12, the query “Find
mitigations for CVE-2025-9492” retrieves both ATT&CK-
level and CWE-level countermeasures, including behaviour
prevention, operating system hardening, user awareness train-
ing, and secure design practices. All returned mitigations
are consistent with ground-truth relationships encoded in
the BRIDG-ICS knowledge graph. Fine-tuning further en-
ables the model to infer additional plausible mitigation paths
beyond explicitly linked edges, producing structurally valid
recommendations through relational generalization. These
inferred strategies remain semantically aligned with estab-
lished countermeasures, indicating that fine-tuning supports
controlled path expansion without introducing unsupported
mitigation associations.
5https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0004/


24
Fig. 9: Example of multi-hop attack path reasoning between industrial assets.
Fig. 10: Example of vulnerability-centric analysis for a specific CVE.
Fig. 11: Adversarial technique attribution using multi-hop graph reasoning in GRICS. The framework traverses Group–
Malware–Technique relationships to identify relevant ATT&CK techniques and generate structured explanations.
The presented use cases highlight the capability of GRICS
to seamlessly integrate attack path analysis, vulnerability
assessment, adversarial attribution, and mitigation planning
within a unified graph-grounded reasoning framework. Through
interpretable multi-hop inference and structured knowledge
synthesis, the system minimizes manual correlation efforts
and strengthens evidence-based cybersecurity decision-making
in complex Industry 5.0 industrial ecosystems.


25
Fig. 12: Example of automatically generated mitigation recommendations derived from multi-hop graph reasoning.
End-to-End Explainability Example
Figure 13 presents an end-to-end reasoning example illustrat-
ing the transparency of the proposed framework by exposing
each stage of the graph-grounded inference pipeline. The
example demonstrates how analysts can inspect the generated
Cypher query, retrieved graph evidence, intermediate graph
traversals, and the final grounded response, enabling every
reasoning step to be traced and verified.
Unlike conventional LLM-based systems that directly gen-
erate responses, GRICS separates reasoning into two stages.
The first LLM translates the analyst’s natural-language query
into an executable Cypher query, which is subsequently exe-
cuted over the BRIDG-ICS knowledge graph. The retrieved
graph evidence, including the discovered attack paths and in-
termediate entities, is then provided to a second LLM, which
is not fine-tuned and is responsible solely for generating a
human-readable summary of the retrieved evidence.
This graph-grounded design enables every generated re-
sponse to be traced back to explicit knowledge graph evidence
rather than opaque neural reasoning. Analysts can verify the
generated Cypher query, inspect the returned graph enti-
ties and relationships, and confirm that the final response
is fully supported by the retrieved evidence. Consequently,
the reasoning process remains transparent, explainable, and
auditable throughout the inference pipeline. Although this
example is not a formal human-subject study, it illustrates
the framework’s explainability artifacts that support analyst
inspection, evidence verification, and informed cybersecurity
decisions.
7 Discussion
7.1 Neuro-Symbolic Reasoning
The experimental results demonstrate that GRICS improves
cyber threat intelligence reasoning across both CTI-RCM and
CTI-ATE tasks. These gains extend beyond predictive perfor-
mance, reflecting a shift toward structured and semantically
grounded reasoning enabled by the integration of fine-tuning
and graph grounding. Unlike conventional text-based RAG
approaches, which rely on pattern matching over unstructured
data, GRICS leverages explicit relationships within the knowl-
edge graph, preserving logical consistency across entities
such as CVEs, CWEs, and ATT&CK techniques. This is
particularly critical in cybersecurity, where incorrect associa-
tions may propagate through downstream analysis. Compared
to existing Graph-RAG approaches such as GraphRAG [49]
and KG2RAG [31], which primarily rely on embedding-
based or subgraph expansion strategies, GRICS introduces a
tighter integration of symbolic query execution with neural
retrieval. While these methods improve contextual relevance,
they may still produce semantically plausible but structurally
inconsistent relationships due to the absence of constraint-
driven reasoning. In contrast, the Cypher-based symbolic
retrieval in GRICS ensures that inferred relationships remain
consistent with the underlying graph structure, improving rea-
soning fidelity and interpretability. Furthermore, relative to
cybersecurity-focused approaches such as CyKG-RAG [55],
GRICS extends structured retrieval through fine-tuned query
generation and hybrid fallback mechanisms, enabling more
robust handling of ambiguous and compositional queries.
This structured reasoning also contributes to the ro-
bustness characteristics of GRICS. Under the ATT&CK-
oriented robustness evaluation, GRICS demonstrates re-


26
Fig. 13: Explainability case study showing the analyst query, generated Cypher query, retrieved graph evidence, and final
grounded response.
silience against adversarial prompt injection while preserving
graph-consistent retrieval. Although it does not achieve the
lowest Attack Success Rate (ASR), the results indicate that
symbolic graph grounding provides a degree of protection
against adversarial manipulation. Nevertheless, the evaluation
also shows that graph grounding alone does not eliminate
adversarial vulnerabilities, highlighting the need for more
robust graph-aware defence mechanisms and standardised
robustness evaluation protocols.
7.2 Human–AI Collaborative Intelligence
The findings indicate that GRICS is most appropriately po-
sitioned as a decision-support framework rather than an
autonomous cybersecurity system. Its graph-grounded rea-
soning capabilities can reduce the effort required to correlate
vulnerabilities, weaknesses, attack patterns, adversarial tech-
niques, affected assets, and mitigations. However, the resulting
recommendations should complement, rather than replace,
expert judgement.
This collaborative role is particularly important in Indus-
try 5.0 environments, where cybersecurity decisions may af-
fect safety-critical assets, production continuity, and physical
operations. By exposing generated Cypher queries, retrieved
entities, and graph traversal paths, GRICS allows analysts
to examine the evidence underlying each recommendation
and determine whether it is consistent with the operational
context. Human experts remain responsible for incorporating
information that may not be represented in the knowledge
graph, including asset configurations, organisational priori-
ties, operational constraints, and acceptable risk levels. The
interaction between analysts and GRICS therefore combines
complementary capabilities. The framework provides scalable
knowledge correlation and structured multi-hop reasoning,
while analysts contribute contextual understanding, domain
expertise, and accountability. This division of responsibil-
ity supports more transparent and informed cybersecurity
decision-making while limiting the risks associated with fully
automated responses.
The explainability artifacts exposed by GRICS, including
generated Cypher queries, retrieved entities, and explicit graph
traversal paths, support analyst verification and accountable
decision-making without transferring final authority to the
automated system.
7.3 Implications for Cybersecurity and Industry 5.0 Systems
The findings have important implications for cybersecurity
analysis in Industry 5.0 environments as follows:
First, the ability to generate explainable multi-hop reasoning
paths addresses a key limitation of existing AI-driven security
systems, which often lack transparency. By exposing inter-
mediate Cypher queries and graph traversal paths, GRICS
enables analysts to verify reasoning steps, improving trust,
auditability, and decision reliability in safety-critical contexts.
Second, the hybrid retrieval mechanism demonstrates that
combining symbolic reasoning with embedding-based fall-
back provides a practical balance between precision and
robustness. The embedding space analysis confirms stable
semantic neighbourhoods, enabling reliable identification of
relevant anchor nodes when symbolic query execution fails.
This integration strengthens retrieval reliability by allowing


27
semantic recovery while ensuring that the final evidence re-
mains grounded through ontology-compliant symbolic graph
execution.
Third, GRICS advances Human–AI collaboration by enabling
analysts to interact with complex cyber-physical knowledge
through natural language while maintaining traceability to
underlying graph evidence. This capability is particularly rel-
evant for Industry 5.0 systems, where tightly coupled IT/OT
environments require interpretable and context-aware deci-
sion support.
Finally, the framework highlights the potential for integration
with digital twin environments. By coupling graph-based
reasoning with real-time or simulated system representations,
GRICS could support dynamic risk assessment, attack path
simulation, and proactive defence planning, enabling contin-
uous monitoring and adaptive reasoning in cyber–physical
systems.
Scalability Considerations. The current evaluation is con-
ducted on the BRIDG-ICS knowledge graph and therefore
provides an initial computational baseline for GRICS. For
substantially larger enterprise knowledge graphs, scalabil-
ity would depend on graph size, local relationship density,
reasoning depth, embedding-search cost, and graph-update
frequency. Because GRICS performs localized Cypher traver-
sal rather than exhaustive graph exploration, retrieval latency
is expected to be influenced more by the size and density of
the queried neighbourhood than by total graph size alone,
although deeper multi-hop queries may incur higher traversal
cost.
Node embeddings are generated offline and reused dur-
ing inference, so embedding regeneration is mainly required
when graph entities are added or updated rather than for every
query. Memory requirements would also increase with the
number of graph entities, relationships, and stored embed-
dings, while the main GPU-memory requirement remains
associated with the LLM. Performance on substantially larger
industrial knowledge graphs has not yet been empirically
validated and may require further optimisation or alternative
architectural approaches for enterprise-scale deployment.
Ontology Maintenance and Evolution. Industrial cyberse-
curity knowledge evolves continuously as new vulnerabilities,
attack techniques, assets, and threat relationships emerge.
Although dynamic ontology evolution is not evaluated in
the current implementation, GRICS can accommodate future
BRIDG-ICS updates through periodic or continuous CTI in-
gestion. Newly collected CTI records could be normalised and
mapped to the existing ontology before being synchronised
with the Neo4j knowledge graph. New or modified graph
entities would also require corresponding embedding up-
dates to maintain consistency between symbolic and semantic
retrieval.
More substantial ontology changes, such as the intro-
duction of new entity classes or relationship types, would
additionally require synchronisation with the ontology con-
straints used for Cypher generation. Maintaining alignment
among the ontology, knowledge graph, embeddings, and
query-generation instructions would therefore be an impor-
tant consideration for future deployment in continuously
evolving industrial environments.
7.4 Limitations and Open Research Questions
Limitations. The study is subject to the following limitations:
1. Reasoning and retrieval limitations. Reasoning qual-
ity is sensitive to graph sparsity, ontology complexity,
and increasing hop depth. Long or compositional queries
may produce incomplete, redundant, or invalid Cypher
statements, while the size of the BRIDG-ICS ontology
introduces token overhead that may restrict the available
context. The current evaluation also considers only one
embedding model; therefore, the effects of alternative
embedding approaches on retrieval quality and seman-
tic separation remain uncertain. In addition, after an
embedding-based graph anchor is identified, successful
retrieval still depends on regenerating a valid ontology-
compliant Cypher query. Predefined query patterns and
overlapping candidate queries may further reduce flexi-
bility and increase retrieval overhead.
2. Scalability and deployment limitations. Although the
current evaluation characterises runtime, memory utilisa-
tion, and computational complexity within the BRIDG-
ICS environment, performance over substantially larger
enterprise knowledge graphs has not yet been empiri-
cally validated. Larger graph structures may introduce
additional retrieval latency, embedding-maintenance cost,
memory requirements, and operational overhead depend-
ing on graph density and update frequency. Enterprise-
scale deployment may therefore require additional opti-
misation strategies or alternative architectural approaches
to maintain practical retrieval and reasoning performance
as the knowledge graph grows.
3. Dual-LLM deployment considerations. The dual-LLM
architecture introduces additional computational and de-
ployment overhead compared with single-model RAG
pipelines because separate inference stages are required
for Cypher generation and response synthesis. This can in-
crease inference cost, latency, memory requirements, and
system-integration complexity, particularly when larger
language models are employed. Although the current im-
plementation can operate with locally deployed models,
deployments that rely on externally hosted LLM services
may additionally introduce API costs, network latency, ser-
vice availability dependencies, and data-governance con-


28
siderations. These trade-offs represent practical deploy-
ment limitations that should be considered when applying
GRICS in resource-constrained or security-sensitive in-
dustrial environments.
4. Human-centred evaluation. Although GRICS provides
graph-grounded explanations and traceable reasoning ev-
idence, the current study does not evaluate these capabili-
ties with cybersecurity practitioners. Future work could
involve user studies with analysts performing representa-
tive threat-investigation tasks to assess explanation use-
fulness, trust, evidence verification, and decision-making
efficiency. Such evaluation would provide a more direct
assessment of the practical value of GRICS for human–AI
collaboration in cybersecurity operations.
5. Cross-framework robustness comparison. Although
the robustness evaluation was restricted to ATT&CK-
oriented reasoning tasks to improve comparability with
PoisonRAG and GRAPPOISON, differences remain in
the underlying knowledge graphs, ontology structures,
retrieval architectures, and adversarial settings. Conse-
quently, the reported ASR and TPQ results provide quali-
tative insight rather than a fully controlled comparison,
and direct quantitative superiority over these frameworks
cannot be established.
Open Research Questions The limitations observed in this
study highlight several unresolved challenges in graph-grounded
cyber threat intelligence. Reasoning over industrial knowledge
graphs containing millions of entities requires scalable index-
ing, retrieval, and traversal mechanisms that preserve explain-
ability. Future work should therefore investigate approximate
nearest-neighbour indexing, distributed graph processing, and
more efficient graph representations. Cybersecurity ontolo-
gies must also adapt to emerging threats, vulnerabilities, and
relationships with limited manual intervention, motivating
research into automated cyber threat intelligence ingestion, in-
cremental graph updates, and ontology evolution. In addition,
controlled robustness evaluations using identical knowledge
graphs, attack settings, and evaluation protocols are required
to support fair comparison with other Graph-RAG systems. Fi-
nally, systematic studies involving cybersecurity analysts are
needed to assess usability, interpretability, cognitive workload,
decision quality, and analyst trust in operational environments.
8 Conclusion
This paper presents GRICS, a Human–AI collaborative
knowledge-graph framework for explainable threat reasoning
in advanced manufacturing and Industry 5.0 environments.
The study addresses a key limitation of existing RAG and
Graph-RAG approaches for cybersecurity, which often strug-
gle to maintain structurally valid multi-hop reasoning across
tightly coupled IT and OT systems. The proposed frame-
work addresses this challenge by unifying the BRIDG-ICS
ontology, Cypher-based symbolic retrieval, controlled em-
bedding fallback, and LLM answer synthesis in a single
neuro-symbolic pipeline. Experiments show that it improves
reasoning accuracy and usability. On CTI-RCM and CTI-ATE
benchmarks, it consistently outperformed baseline LLMs,
with the fine-tuned, graph-enhanced setup performing the
best. The framework also increases retrieval transparency by
resolving more queries via symbolic graph traversal, reducing
reliance on approximate fallback, and generating traceable evi-
dence chains. Robustness analysis shows that graph-grounded
reasoning better preserves coherent multi-hop inference under
adversarial and structurally complex queries. By exposing
intermediate Cypher queries, graph evidence, and reasoning
paths, the framework supports interpretable Human–AI col-
laboration, analyst trust, and informed decision-making in
safety-critical settings.
Future work will investigate Symbolic Intelligence-driven
digital twins, augmented with AI and ontological reason-
ing, alongside adaptive retrieval strategies and real-time cy-
ber–physical threat monitoring. Combining graph-grounded
reasoning with dynamic cyber-physical system representa-
tions offers a promising path for real-time risk assessment,
attack simulation, and adaptive defence planning. Such ad-
vances would bridge static threat intelligence with evolving
system states, positioning the framework as a foundation
for next-generation, resilient, and explainable cybersecurity
assistants in complex industrial environments.
This work demonstrates that graph-grounded neuro-symbolic
reasoning provides an effective foundation for explainable
cyber threat intelligence in Industry 5.0 environments. By
combining symbolic graph retrieval with large language
model reasoning, GRICS enables transparent, context-aware,
and multi-hop threat analysis while maintaining traceabil-
ity to structured cybersecurity knowledge. We believe this
framework provides a promising foundation for future graph-
grounded cybersecurity assistants supporting advanced man-
ufacturing systems.
Declarations
Data Availability. The datasets used in this study are publicly
accessible via the project’s GitHub repository: Resellient-
Industry-5.0–KG aware Cybersecurity Intelligence Modelling.
Funding. This work is supported by the Edith Cowan Uni-
versity, Australia Early and Mid-Career Research (EMCR)
Grant.
Acknowledgements. We acknowledge the School of Science
(Computing and Security Discipline) for providing access to
the Industry 5.0 systems testbed and GPU resources used for
LLM-driven knowledge graph enrichment and fine-tuning.


29
Generative AI Use. The authors acknowledge the use of
OpenAI ChatGPT to assist with language refinement and
grammatical review.
Competing Interests. The authors declare no competing
interests.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Writing – original draft: P.N., A.M.; Writing – review and
editing: A.M., P.N., A.I., I.H.S., H.J.; Project administration:
A.M.
References
1. S. Nahavandi, Sustainability 11(16), 4371 (2019). DOI
10.3390/su11164371
2. H. Srinivasan, M. Karimi. Threat-based security controls
to protect industrial control systems (2025). URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2501.13268
3. D. Bhamare, M. Zolanvari, A. Erbad, R. Jain, K. Khan,
N. Meskin. Cybersecurity for industrial control systems:
A survey (2020). URL https://arxiv.org/abs/20
02.04124
4. M. Nankya, R. Chataut, R. Akl, Sensors 23(21), 8840
(2023). DOI 10.3390/s23218840. URL https://doi.
org/10.3390/s23218840
5. M.D. Firoozjaei, N. Mahmoudyar, Y. Baseri, A.A.
Ghorbani, International Journal of Critical Infrastruc-
ture Protection 36, 100487 (2022).
DOI https://do
i.org/10.1016/j.ijcip.2021.100487.
URL https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pi
i/S1874548221000718
6. A. Saini, K. Krishan, M.S. Gaur, Computers and Elec-
trical Engineering 132, 110967 (2026).
DOI https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.compeleceng.2026.110967. URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/arti
cle/pii/S0045790626000352
7. M. Homaei, M. Tarif, P.G. Rodríguez, A. Caro, M. Ávila,
Machine Learning with Applications 23, 100824 (2026).
DOI 10.1016/j.mlwa.2025.100824. URL http://dx.d
oi.org/10.1016/j.mlwa.2025.100824
8. A. Borah, M.T. Alam, N. Rastogi.
Adapting large
language models to emerging cybersecurity using re-
trieval augmented generation (2025).
URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2510.27080
9. A. Gusarov, A. Volkova, V. Khrulkov, A. Kuznetsov,
E. Maslov, I. Oseledets. Multi-agent graphrag: A text-
to-cypher framework for labeled property graphs (2025).
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.08274
10. M. Kim, J. Wang, K. Moore, D. Goel, D. Wang,
A. Mohsin, A. Ibrahim, R. Doss, S. Camtepe, H. Jan-
icke, in Companion Proceedings of the ACM on Web
Conference 2025 (Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 2025), WWW ’25, p. 2851–2854.
DOI 10.1145/3701716.3715171.
URL https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3701716.3715171
11. A. Mohsin, H. Janicke, A. Ibrahim, M.I. Sarker,
S. Camtepe. A unified framework for human–ai col-
laboration in security operations centers with trusted
autonomy (2026).
DOI 10.1145/3837073.
URL
https://doi.org/10.1145/3837073
12. A.O.M. Saleh, G. Tur, Y. Saygin, in Proceedings of the
7th International Conference on Natural Language and
Speech Processing (ICNLSP 2024), ed. by M. Abbas,
A.A. Freihat (Association for Computational Linguistics,
Trento, 2024), pp. 439–448. URL https://aclantho
logy.org/2024.icnlsp-1.45/
13. J. Fang, Z. Meng, C. Macdonald. Trace the evidence:
Constructing knowledge-grounded reasoning chains for
retrieval-augmented generation (2024). URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2406.11460
14. J. Chen, H. Lin, X. Han, L. Sun. Benchmarking large lan-
guage models in retrieval-augmented generation (2023).
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.01431
15. Q. Zhang, S. Chen, Y. Bei, Z. Yuan, H. Zhou, Z. Hong,
H. Chen, Y. Xiao, C. Zhou, J. Dong, Y. Chang, X. Huang.
A survey of graph retrieval-augmented generation for
customized large language models (2025). URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2501.13958
16. L.F. Sikos, Knowledge and Information Systems 65, 3511
(2023). DOI 10.1007/s10115-023-01860-3. URL ht
tps://doi.org/10.1007/s10115-023-01860-3.
Received: 1 November 2021; Revised: 26 February 2023;
Accepted: 11 March 2023; Published: 29 April 2023
17. H. Gao, H. Tong, B. Yong, G. Shen, Electronics 15(3)
(2026). DOI 10.3390/electronics15030552. URL
https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/15/3/552
18. B. Lourenço, P. Adão, J.F. Ferreira, M.M. Marques,
C. Vaz. Structuring security: A survey of cybersecurity
ontologies, semantic log processing, and llms application
(2025). URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.16610
19. F. ..zdemir S..nmez, C. Hankin, P. Malacaria, Computers
& Security 123, 102938 (2022). DOI https://doi.org/10
.1016/j.cose.2022.102938. URL https://www.scie
ncedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167404
822003303
20. P. Liu, X. Wang, Q. Fu, Y. Yang, Y.F. Li, Q. Zhang,
Knowledge-Based Systems 250, 108870 (2022). DOI
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2022.108870. URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/arti
cle/pii/S0950705122004154
21. Z.Z.S. Moghaddam, Z. Dehghani, M. Rani, K. Aslansefat,
B.K. Mishra, R.R. Kureshi, D. Thakker. Explainable
knowledge graph retrieval-augmented generation (kg-
rag) with kg-smile (2025). URL https://arxiv.org/


30
abs/2509.03626
22. A. Hoenig, K. Roy, Y. Acquaah, S. Yi, IEEE Access PP,
1 (2024). DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3395444
23. P. Nandiya, A. Mohsin, A. Ibrahim, I.H. Sarker, H. Jan-
icke, Cybersecurity 9(1), 167 (2026). DOI 10.1186/s424
00-026-00597-0. URL https://doi.org/10.1186/
s42400-026-00597-0
24. A. Rejeb, K. Rejeb, I. Zrelli, et al., Discover Sustainability
6, 307 (2025). DOI 10.1007/s43621-025-01166-0. URL
https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-025-01166
-0
25. K. Liu, F. Wang, Z. Ding, S. Liang, Z. Yu, Y. Zhou.
A review of knowledge graph application scenarios in
cyber security (2022). URL https://arxiv.org/ab
s/2204.04769
26. K. Kurniawan, E. Kiesling, D. Winkler, A. Ekelhart, pp.
153–170 (2025)
27. P. Lewis, E. Perez, A. Piktus, F. Petroni, V. Karpukhin,
N. Goyal, H. Küttler, M. Lewis, W. tau Yih, T. Rock-
täschel, S. Riedel, D. Kiela. Retrieval-augmented gen-
eration for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks (2021). URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.11401
28. Y. Hu, Y. Lu.
Rag and rau: A survey on retrieval-
augmented language model in natural language process-
ing (2025). URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.1
9543
29. W. Fan, Y. Ding, L. Ning, S. Wang, H. Li, D. Yin, T.S.
Chua, Q. Li, in Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
(Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 2024), KDD ’24, p. 6491–6501. DOI 10.1145/36
37528.3671470. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/
3637528.3671470
30. Y. Cai, Z. Guo, Y. Pei, W. Bian, W. Zheng. Simgrag:
Leveraging similar subgraphs for knowledge graphs
driven retrieval-augmented generation (2025).
URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15272
31. X. Zhu, Y. Xie, Y. Liu, Y. Li, W. Hu. Knowledge graph-
guided retrieval augmented generation (2025). URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.06864
32. Y. Hu, Z. Lei, Z. Zhang, B. Pan, C. Ling, L. Zhao. Grag:
Graph retrieval-augmented generation (2025).
URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.16506
33. M. Barrère, C. Hankin, D. O’Reilly, Computers & Secu-
rity 132, 103348 (2023). DOI https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cose.2023.103348. URL https://www.sciencedir
ect.com/science/article/pii/S0167404823002
584
34. M.H. Rahman, E.Y. Hamedani, Y.J. Son, M. Shafae,
Journal of Computing and Information Science in Engi-
neering 24(7) (2024). DOI 10.1115/1.4063729. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1115/1.4063729
35. M. Barrère, C. Hankin, N. Nicolaou, D.G. Eliades,
T. Parisini, Journal of Information Security and Applica-
tions 52, 102471 (2020). DOI https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ji
sa.2020.102471. URL https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S2214212619311342
36. K. Liu, Y. Xie, S. Xie, L. Sun, Journal of Process Control
132, 103131 (2023). DOI https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jproco
nt.2023.103131. URL https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0959152423002184
37. D. Zheng, M. Lapata, J.Z. Pan. How reliable are llms as
knowledge bases? re-thinking facutality and consistency
(2024). URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.13578
38. V. Karpukhin, B. Oğuz, S. Min, P. Lewis, L. Wu,
S. Edunov, D. Chen, W. tau Yih. Dense passage re-
trieval for open-domain question answering (2020). URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.04906
39. S. Wang, H. Yang, W. Liu, Scientific Reports 15, 40425
(2025). DOI 10.1038/s41598-025-21222-z. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-21222-z
40. Y. Zhang, S. Mao, T. Ge, X. Wang, A. de Wynter, Y. Xia,
W. Wu, T. Song, M. Lan, F. Wei. Llm as a mastermind: A
survey of strategic reasoning with large language models
(2024). URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.01230
41. K. Guu, K. Lee, Z. Tung, P. Pasupat, M.W. Chang. Realm:
Retrieval-augmented language model pre-training (2020).
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.08909
42. A. Grover, J. Leskovec, in Proceedings of the 22nd
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining (2016), pp. 855–864
43. X. Xie, Z. Li, X. Wang, Z. Xi, N. Zhang. Lambdakg: A
library for pre-trained language model-based knowledge
graph embeddings (2023). URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2210.00305
44. Z. Chen, X. Wang, Z. Li, W. Guo, D. He. Kg-bilm:
Knowledge graph embedding via bidirectional language
models (2025). URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2506
.03576
45. S. Ma, C. Xu, X. Jiang, M. Li, H. Qu, C. Yang,
J. Mao, J. Guo. Think-on-graph 2.0: Deep and faith-
ful large language model reasoning with knowledge-
guided retrieval augmented generation (2025). URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.10805
46. Z. Yang, L. Weng, L. Zhang, R. Tong, J. Xie, Z. Zeng,
D. Chen, PLOS ONE 20(10), e0333037 (2025). DOI
10.1371/journal.pone.0333037
47. Y. Chen, S. Sun, X. Hu, Applied Sciences 15(12) (2025).
DOI 10.3390/app15126722. URL https://www.mdpi
.com/2076-3417/15/12/6722
48. P. Sarthi, S. Abdullah, A. Tuli, S. Khanna, A. Goldie,
C.D. Manning. Raptor: Recursive abstractive processing
for tree-organized retrieval (2024). URL https://ar
xiv.org/abs/2401.18059


31
49. H. Han, Y. Wang, H. Shomer, K. Guo, J. Ding, Y. Lei,
M. Halappanavar, R.A. Rossi, S. Mukherjee, X. Tang,
Q. He, Z. Hua, B. Long, T. Zhao, N. Shah, A. Javari,
Y. Xia, J. Tang, arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.00309 (2025).
DOI 10.48550/arXiv.2501.00309. URL https://arxi
v.org/abs/2501.00309
50. Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, P.S. Yu,
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning
Systems 32(1), 4 (2020)
51. Y. Cao, Z. Gao, Z. Li, X. Xie, S.K. Zhou, J. Xu, Pro-
ceedings of the VLDB Endowment 18(10), 3269–3283
(2025).
DOI 10.14778/3748191.3748194.
URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.14778/3748191.3748194
52. C. Mavromatis, G. Karypis. Gnn-rag: Graph neural
retrieval for large language model reasoning (2024).
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.20139
53. M. Simoni, A. Saracino, V. P., M. Conti.
Morse:
Bridging the gap in cybersecurity expertise with re-
trieval augmented generation (2024).
URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2407.15748
54. R. Fayyazi, S.H. Trueba, M. Zuzak, S.J. Yang. Proverag:
Provenance-driven vulnerability analysis with automated
retrieval-augmented llms (2025). URL https://arxi
v.org/abs/2410.17406
55. K. Kurniawan, E. Kiesling, A. Ekelhart, (2024)
56. J. Liang, Y. Wang, C. Li, R. Zhu, T. Jiang, N. Gong,
T. Wang. Graphrag under fire (2025). URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2501.14050
57. L. Liu, Z. Wang, H. Tong. Neural-symbolic reasoning
over knowledge graphs: A survey from a query perspec-
tive (2024). URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.1
0390
58. L.N. DeLong, R.F. Mir, J.D. Fleuriot, IEEE Transac-
tions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 36(5),
7822–7842 (2025). DOI 10.1109/tnnls.2024.3420218.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2024.
3420218
59. J. Zhang, B. Chen, L. Zhang, X. Ke, H. Ding, AI Open
2, 14 (2021). DOI https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiopen.202
1.03.001. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2666651021000061
60. S. Chen, H. Fang, Y. Cai, X. Huang, M. Sun, in Pro-
ceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems (Curran Associates Inc.,
Red Hook, NY, USA, 2023), NIPS ’23
61. K. Cheng, N.K. Ahmed, R.A. Rossi, T. Willke, Y. Sun,
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data 18(9) (2024). DOI
10.1145/3686806. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/
3686806
62. X. Liu, T. Mao, Y. Shi, Y. Ren, Neurocomputing 585,
127571 (2024). DOI https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2
024.127571. URL https://www.sciencedirect.co
m/science/article/pii/S0925231224003424
63. R. Angles, M. Arenas, P. Barceló, A. Hogan, J.L. Reutter,
D. Vrgoč, ACM Computing Surveys 50(5), 1 (2018)
64. S. Purkayastha, S. Dana, D. Garg, D. Khandelwal, G.P.S.
Bhargav. Knowledge graph question answering via sparql
silhouette generation (2021). URL https://arxiv.or
g/abs/2109.09475
65. Z. Zhao, X. Ge, Z. Shen. S2ctrans: Building a bridge
from sparql to cypher (2023). URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2304.00531
66. C. Mavromatis, S. Adeshina, V.N. Ioannidis, Z. Han,
Q. Zhu, I. Robinson, B. Thompson, H. Rangwala,
G. Karypis. Byokg-rag: Multi-strategy graph retrieval
for knowledge graph question answering (2025). URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.04127
67. B. Liu, J. Zhang, F. Lin, C. Yang, M. Peng, W. Yin. Syma-
gent: A neural-symbolic self-learning agent framework
for complex reasoning over knowledge graphs (2025).
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.03283
68. Q. Lin, F. Xu, H. Lu, K. He, R. Mao, J. Liu, E. Cambria,
M. Feng. Towards unified neurosymbolic reasoning on
knowledge graphs (2025). URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2507.03697
69. R. Fieblinger, M.T. Alam, N. Rastogi. Actionable cyber
threat intelligence using knowledge graphs and large
language models (2024). URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2407.02528
70. Z. Wu, F. Tang, M. Zhao, Y. Li.
Kgv: Integrating
large language models with knowledge graphs for cyber
threat intelligence credibility assessment (2025). URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.08088
71. X. Yang, R. Zhong, Y. Chen, G. Peng, D. Yao, C. Chen,
C. Wang, D. Zhang, Y. Zhou, Z. Yang, Cybersecurity
9(1), 106 (2026). DOI 10.1186/s42400-025-00505-y.
URL https://doi.org/10.1186/s42400-025-0
0505-y
72. B. Strom, A. Applebaum, D. Miller, K. Nickels, A. Pen-
nington, C. Thomas, MITRE Corporation (2020). Avail-
able at: https://attack.mitre.org
73. S. Barnum, in Proceedings of the 12th IEEE International
Conference on Information Technology: New Generations
(ITNG) (2019), pp. 347–352. DOI 10.1109/ITNG.2019.
00123
74. S. Barnum, et al., Structured threat information expres-
sion (stix®) version 2.0. Tech. rep., OASIS Open (2017).
Available at: https://oasis-open.github.io/ct
i-documentation/
75. A. Syed, J. Undercoffer, K. Maly, in Proceedings of the
14th International Conference on Availability, Reliability
and Security (ARES) (2019), pp. 1–8. DOI 10.1145/33
39252.3340502
76. M. Kandefer, S. Pritchett, M. Chiaramonte, R. Lemos,
in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
on Big Data (BigData) (2020), pp. 5699–5708. DOI


32
10.1109/BigData50022.2020.9378342
77. X. Li, Q. Wang, J. Li, Y. Liu, in Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Communications and Network Security
(CNS) (2022), pp. 249–257. DOI 10.1109/CNS56104.2
022.00045
78. L. Sridhar, V. Rao, Procedia Computer Science 206, 103
(2022). DOI 10.1016/j.procs.2022.10.276
79. B. Li, Q. Yang, C. Deng, H. Pan, Informatics 12(3)
(2025). URL https://www.mdpi.com/2227-9709/
12/3/100
80. B. Peng, Y. Zhu, Y. Liu, X. Bo, H. Shi, C. Hong, Y. Zhang,
S. Tang, ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. 44(2) (2025). DOI
10.1145/3777378. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/
3777378
81. Y. Li, W. Zhang, Y. Yang, W.C. Huang, Y. Wu, J. Luo,
Y. Bei, H.P. Zou, X. Luo, Y. Zhao, C. Chan, Y. Chen,
Z. Deng, Y. Li, H.T. Zheng, D. Li, R. Jiang, M. Zhang,
Y. Song, P.S. Yu. Towards agentic rag with deep reason-
ing: A survey of rag-reasoning systems in llms (2025).
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.09477
82. M.T. Alam, D. Bhusal, L. Nguyen, N. Rastogi. Ctibench:
A benchmark for evaluating llms in cyber threat intelli-
gence (2024). URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406
.07599
83. Z. Yang, P. Qi, S. Zhang, Y. Bengio, W.W. Cohen,
R. Salakhutdinov, C.D. Manning. Hotpotqa: A dataset
for diverse, explainable multi-hop question answering
(2018). URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.09600
