Title: Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability: The Manifestation Unit Protocol

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.00089v1

Published Time: Thu, 02 Jul 2026 00:07:11 GMT

Number of Pages: 65

Markdown Content:
# Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability: The Manifestation Unit Protocol 

Hussein Chouman 1 Wataru Sasaki 1 Tomokazu Matsui 1 Hirohiko Suwa 1 Keiichi Yasumoto 1

## Abstract 

Mechanistic interpretability has produced a rich inventory of component-level analyses that char-acterise what neural-network components encode and how they interact. Their outputs, however, are not easily reusable: selectivity tables, cir-cuit diagrams, and feature lists remain locked in per-study notebooks—non-composable, not queryable in natural language, and not directly actionable for downstream audit or intervention. We study the representation layer that sits be-tween these analyses and downstream use as a bottleneck that can be evaluated independently and introduce Manifestation Units , a typed tuple protocol (E, S, R, D, G ) extended with attention-head primitives (T ) for transformer architectures organising per-component statistics into struc-tured fields populated automatically and queried through hybrid retrieval. Instantiated across gen-erative vision ( β-VAE), discriminative vision (CNN), and language (GPT-2), the protocol sup-ports two findings: typed structure substantially outperforms unstructured baselines on retrieval, and CNN filters retrieved by the schema satisfy causal sufficiency and necessity criteria under matched-budget controls. The schema absorbs attention-head primitives without modification, set-recovers known IOI circuit members under retrieval-budget-matched controls, and reveals an irreducible two-field core ( S+R) with remaining fields either redundant or actively interfering. We present this as schema infrastructure for mech-anistic interpretability rather than frontier-scale validation. 1

> 1

Ubiquitous Computing Systems Laboratory, Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Nara, Japan. Correspondence to: Hussein Chouman <chouman.hussein.ck5@naist.ac.jp >.

Preprint. July 2, 2026. 

> 1

Transformer and CNN demos are available at https://manifestation-xai.github.io/manifestation-transformers/ and https://manifestation-xai.github.io/manifestation-cnn/. 

## 1. Introduction 

Mechanistic interpretability has produced a rich inventory of analysis techniques for characterising what neural-network components encode and how they interact: Network Dis-section, probing classifiers, sparse-autoencoder decompo-sitions, and circuit analyses (Bau et al., 2017; Belinkov, 2022; Lieberum et al., 2024; Elhage et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2023; Olsson et al., 2022; Conmy et al., 2023). Their outputs, however, are not easily reusable. Selectivity tables, circuit diagrams, and SAE feature lists remain in per-study notebooks and scripts: not composable, not queryable in nat-ural language, and not directly actionable for downstream audit or intervention. A practitioner asks of a trained CNN: “which filters en-code ‘dog’, and what happens if I amplify them?” The needed statistics—selectivity, activation correlations, ab-lation effects—already exist, but there is no grounded in-terface to ask. Semantic search fails on numerical iden-tifiers (Li et al., 2023), exact-match fails on conceptual queries, and free-form prose loses the typing that separates “which filters detect dog” from “what does filter 81 detect.” We study the representation layer that sits between component-level analyses and downstream use, holding the analyses themselves fixed. We introduce Manifestation Units , a typed tuple protocol (E, S, R, D, G, T ) that organ-ises per-component statistics into six fields aligned with distinct query primitives: entity identity ( E), semantic asso-ciations ( S), cross-component relations ( R), quantified dy-namics ( D), intervention guidance ( G), and attention-head primitives ( T ). Each field is extracted automatically from ac-tivations and validation-set statistics; no human annotation is involved. A hybrid retriever combines exact-matching on 

E with dense semantic search over the remaining fields. We evaluate two hypotheses about this representation layer. 

H1 (structural accessibility). Natural-language retrieval over component-level analyses requires typed structure , not just the underlying content—random partitions of the same content fail to match the ESRDGT decomposition. 

H2 (causal mediation, minimality, and optimality). On the CNN, components retrieved through the structured rep-resentation are causal mediators of the targeted behaviour in the MIB sense (Mueller et al., 2024), established by suf-1

> arXiv:2607.00089v1 [cs.LG] 30 Jun 2026 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability

ficiency and necessity under matched-budget controls. On the GPT-2 schema, a weaker analogue replaces strict causal mediation: the decomposition admits a minimal-optimal 

core ( S+R) confirmed via random-partition controls, with remaining fields either redundant or actively interfering; see §5.4 and App. G. 

Empirical findings. We instantiate the protocol across three architectures spanning generative vision ( β-VAE on CelebA), discriminative vision (CNN on CIFAR-10), and language (GPT-2 attention heads). On the GPT-2 schema, the S+R subset reaches oracle recall@30 of 0.411 , beat-ing random partitions of identical content at p < 0.01 

(Fig. 4D; H1); per-field ablation isolates S (p < 10 −10 )and R (p=.019 ) as the minimal-optimal core , G as redun-dant within that subset, and E/D as actively interfering when added to the full schema (Fig. 4A–C), with the two necessary fields retrieving weakly anti-correlated head rank-ings ( ρ=−0.20 ; Fig. 5B) and thereby complementing one another (H2, minimality and mechanism). On the CNN, retrieved filters flip predictions in 76 .3% of trials under amplification (vs. 6.7% random matched-budget) and zero-ing them drops natural target-class accuracy by 38 .3pp (vs. 

3.6pp); a four-way decomposition attributes +17 .4pp of suf-ficiency to the typed primary-class rule (H2, mediation). On the β-VAE and CNN, structured units reach Precision@5 of 89 .6% and 96 .8% respectively, versus 18 .0% and 20 .4% 

for a BM25-hybrid baseline over the same per-component statistics (H1, original evaluation). On GPT-2, retrieved heads beat matched-budget random retrieval by 2.0–4.5×

across four behaviours and recover 5/7 of the known IOI L7–9 name-mover heads at k=30 .

Contributions. 

1. Manifestation Units (ESRDG[T]) , a typed tuple proto-col for organising component-level analyses, with auto-matic extraction, deterministic template grounding, and hybrid retrieval. The base schema is (E, S, R, D, G );the T field extends it for transformer architectures. 2. Matched-budget protocols establishing structural ac-cessibility (H1, random-partition controls) and the H2 cluster of causal mediation, minimality, and optimality (CNN sufficiency/necessity; GPT-2 per-field ablation)— identifying the minimal-optimal core ( S+R) and charac-terising redundancy ( G within the core) and interference (E, D on the full schema). 3. A GPT-2 attention-head instantiation that supplies the deepest structural evidence—random-partition H1 con-firmation, the S+R minimal-optimal core, and comple-mentary S/R rankings ( ρ=−0.20 )—and recovers known IOI circuit members via set-overlap retrieval, with a principled S-primitive selection procedure validated by reference-set recovery. 

## 2. Related Work 

Mechanistic interpretability and faithfulness. The MI toolkit characterises neural-component behaviour through complementary lenses: circuit analyses describe how com-ponents compose into algorithms (Elhage et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2023; Olsson et al., 2022; Elhage et al., 2022); acti-vation and path patching trace causal pathways through transformers (Meng et al., 2022; Conmy et al., 2023; Goldowsky-Dill et al., 2023); sparse autoencoders decom-pose polysemantic activations into monosemantic features at scale (Lieberum et al., 2024; Cunningham et al., 2024); Net-work Dissection and probing classifiers characterise what individual components encode (Bau et al., 2017; Belinkov, 2022). The MIB benchmark (Mueller et al., 2024) for-malises the two faithfulness notions our evaluation adopts (Sec. 5): response faithfulness —does the output reflect the evidence?—and causal faithfulness —do the identified com-ponents causally mediate the behaviour, established by suf-ficiency and necessity under matched intervention? 

Representation and retrieval over MI outputs. Given any of these analyses—SAE feature activations, circuit identifications, attribution-graph neighbourhoods, probing scores, correlational selectivity—how should the outputs be packaged so they can be queried, grounded, composed, and acted on? Existing community tooling targets programmatic access (TransformerLens, nnsight) and visualisation (Neu-ronpedia, Docent), leaving the typed-representation layer for natural-language querying largely unaddressed. Orgad et al. (2024) document that interpretability findings are frequently not acted on downstream; representation is part of the gap. Standard semantic search fails on neural-component queries because embedding models cannot reliably repre-sent arbitrary numerical identifiers like “dimension 63” (Li et al., 2023), and exact match alone cannot handle concep-tual queries. Structured and entity-aware retrieval (Edge et al., 2024; F ´evry et al., 2020; Yasunaga et al., 2022) shows that typed representations outperform unstructured prose for knowledge-intensive tasks, but targets general-domain knowledge rather than neural internals indexed by arbitrary identifiers. Manifestation Units are designed to compose with the MI toolkit above: S can store SAE fea-ture labels, R can encode head–head or attribution-graph neighbourhoods, and G can encode activation-patching or steering primitives. The Transformer instantiation (Sec. 6) demonstrates this composition on attention-head primitives drawn from Elhage et al. (2021); Olsson et al. (2022); Wang et al. (2023); Goldowsky-Dill et al. (2023); Heimersheim & Nanda (2024). 2Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability         

> Figure 1. Overview of MANIFESTATION. The pipeline extracts Manifestation Units (E, S, R, D, G, T )encoding entity identity ( E), semantic associations ( S), cross-component relationships ( R), quantified dynamics ( D), manipulation guidance ( G), and (for transformers) attention-head primitives ( T). Hybrid retrieval combines exact matching on Ewith semantic search over the remaining fields; the SLM generates responses grounded in retrieved statistics from D.

## 3. The MANIFESTATION Framework 

MANIFESTATION (Fig. 1) populates Manifestation Units automatically from model activations and exposes them through a hybrid retriever for natural-language access. 

3.1. Manifestation Units 

Let I = {1, . . . , n } denote the set of neural network compo-nents to be analysed (latent dimensions in a VAE, filters in a CNN, attention heads in GPT-2). Each component k ∈ I 

is represented as a structured tuple: 

Mk = ( Ek, S k, R k, D k, G k, T k). (1) The decomposition is functional: each field corresponds to a recurring class of user query— E for entity queries (“what does dimension 63 do?”), S for concept queries (“which units encode smiling?”), R for relational queries (“what correlates with dimension 47?”), D for grounded numeric citation, G for intervention queries, and T for attention-head primitives in transformer architectures. The six fields group queries by the retrieval primitive each requires (typed iden-tifier matching, ranked semantic similarity, neighbourhood walks, scalar lookup, parameterised intervention, attention-pattern features). The decomposition is empirically minimal-optimal (Sec. 5.3): S+R is the highest-recall combination across query types with both fields necessary within that subset; G is redundant, and E/D actively interfere on the full schema. 

Entity (E). Ek is a unique, human-readable identifier (e.g., “Dimension 63” or “Filter Conv2.15”) that enables entity-aware exact matching. When a query contains an explicit component reference, pattern extraction on E guarantees retrieval of the correct unit—something embedding-only semantic search cannot reliably achieve for arbitrary identi-fiers. 

Semantics (S). Sk stores concept associations with quanti-fied strengths over a predefined concept vocabulary C (facial attributes for CelebA, class labels for CIFAR-10, functional features for GPT-2). Templates expose only the top-m asso-3Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability 

ciations, ranked by magnitude: 

˜Sk = {(cj , s kj )}mj=1 ranked by |skj |. (2) The primary concept identity is the top-1 concept among the exposed set: 

c∗ 

> k

= arg max  

> j∈[m]

|skj |, s∗ 

> k

= sk,c ∗ 

> k

. (3) The signed score s∗ 

> k

is retained for faithful generation; the absolute value is used only for ranking. Sk is populated by Pearson correlation for VAE dimensions, entropy-based class selectivity for CNN filters, and attention-pattern primi-tives for GPT-2 heads (App. B). 

Relationships (R). Rk encodes cross-component depen-dencies derived from model activations. Let ρki denote a dependency score between components k and i, and let 

tki ∈ { synergistic , antagonistic , independent } indicate rela-tionship polarity. Templates expose a top-r neighbourhood. We use these labels to describe statistical co-activation, not causal mechanisms. Thresholds and tie-breaking detailed in App. B. 

Dynamics (D). Dk is a typed dictionary of quantitative statistics (variance contributions, selectivity summaries, cluster/family memberships, cross-layer dependency scores). These values are rendered into the LLM’s context by deter-ministic templates (Sec. 3.2), and a post-hoc check verifies cited values against stored statistics. 

Guidance (G). Gk stores manipulation parameters (step sizes for VAE latent edits in units of σ, amplification fac-tors for CNN filter activations). These parameters are pre-computed and retrieved, grounding interventions in mea-sured mappings rather than model priors. 

Attention-head primitives (T). For transformer archi-tectures, Tk stores attention-pattern features—induction scores, copying scores, QK and OV circuit norms, and previous/first-token attention ratios—computed from the head’s attention matrices over a reference corpus. Popula-tion details in Sec. 5.4 and App. F.4. 

Template-based grounding. Deterministic templates sub-stitute field values directly, exposing top-m/top-r subsets; every rendered statement traces to a stored field value (App. C.1). 

3.2. Hybrid Retrieval and Generation 

The retriever combines exact-matching on E (for entity-bearing queries) with dense semantic search over templated 

S/R/G/T documents (for conceptual queries); hits are ag-gregated at the unit level before generation (App. C). 

Grounded generation. Generation is next-token predic-tion; faithfulness is enforced upstream (deterministic re-trieval and templating) and verified downstream (post-hoc Factual Accuracy check, >94% across 96 configs; App. M). 

3.3. Natural Language Control as a Causal Probe 

Beyond querying, the framework supports natural-language commands that translate into targeted interventions. Given a command like “make the face smile,” the system identifies the target concept, retrieves components with high associ-ation strength, and applies modification parameters drawn from G. Retrieval here uses a typed primary-class retrieval rule : for target concept c, the system selects only compo-nents whose top-1 entry in ˜S is c, not those where c merely appears in the top-m. This rule is the central element of our H2 protocol (Sec. 5.2); it is only definable because S is a typed ranking, and it converts a correlational ranking into a precise intervention target. We use this capability as a causal probe in the MIB sense (Mueller et al., 2024): causal mediation requires both 

sufficiency (intervening on the components reproduces the targeted behavior) and necessity (ablating them disrupts the behavior under natural inputs). We test both directions on the CNN under matched-budget comparisons against ran-dom selection (Sec. 5.2). 

## 4. Applications 

We instantiate the protocol across three architectures: a 

β-VAE on CelebA ( 512 latent dimensions, 40 binary at-tributes), a CNN on CIFAR-10 ( 224 filters, 10 classes), and GPT-2 small ( 144 attention heads). This triple tests whether (E, S, R, D, G, T ) survives across generative vs. discriminative vs. language models. Measurement: Pear-son correlation (VAE), entropy-based selectivity (CNN), attention-pattern primitives (GPT-2: induction/copying scores, QK/OV norms, position ratios), with pairwise acti-vation correlations for R throughout. Manipulation: zd ←

zd + sign( sd,c ) · 2σd for VAE, a′ 

> f

= α · af for CNN, zero/mean/path-patching ablation for GPT-2 (no ampli-tude semantics). Concept vocabularies: CelebA attributes, CIFAR-10 classes, MI-derived functional features (Sec. 6). Full instantiation matrix in App. F, Table 26. 

## 5. Evaluation 

We organise the evaluation around the two falsifiable hy-potheses of Sec. 1, with a brief response-faithfulness check. 

Setup. Architectures and instantiation details are in Sec. 4. Qwen3-8B is the conversational interface; hybrid re-trieval combines exact match on E with semantic search over S/R/G/T templates. Metrics span retrieval (Preci-4Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability                          

> Table 1. Precision and Factual Accuracy at k=5 , macro-averaged over a 20 /15 /10 /5entity/concept/relational/manipulation mix. The structured system reaches 89.6%/96.8%; BM25 hybrid over the same per-component statistics reaches 18.0%/20.4%, identifying the central H1 gap. Prose serialisation collapses to 3.7%/2.8%, controlling for serialisation choice. Full table (14 configurations): App. N. VAE CNN Configuration Prec F-Acc Prec F-Acc
> Full system (structured + hybrid) 89.6 97.9 96.8 96.8
> BM25 hybrid (same content) 18.0 45.5 20.4 48.5 Unstructured text (prose) 3.7 0.7 2.8 41.9 Exact match only 62.4 78.3 71.2 82.1

sion/Recall/NDCG), generation (BLEU, ROUGE), semantic similarity (BERTScore), and faithfulness (Factual Accuracy = cited statistics matching stored MU fields; Attribution = claims supported by retrieved context); definitions in App. J. VAE/CNN automatic metrics use 50 single-turn queries per architecture (App. F.3); GPT-2 schema-level evaluation uses 8 query paraphrases per IOI-style behaviour (App. F.4). Gold sets are pre-extracted offline and held fixed across all methods. 

5.1. H1 — structure beats content 

H1 predicts that natural-language retrieval over component-level analyses requires typed structure, not just the under-lying content. We test this in two complementary ways: against standard sparse/dense baselines on VAE and CNN with the statistics held fixed (Table 1), and against random partitions of the same per-component text on the GPT-2 schema (Fig. 4D). 

Baseline comparison (VAE/CNN). The structured sys-tem reaches Precision@5 of 89 .6% /96 .8% (VAE/CNN); a BM25-hybrid baseline with full access to the same per-component statistics reaches only 18 .0% /20 .4% , and prose serialisation collapses to 3.7% /2.8% (Table 1, 42). Neither exact-match nor semantic-search alone suffices; the typed 

E vs S/R separation is what the hybrid retriever exploits. 

Structure-versus-content isolation (GPT-2). A stronger test isolates structure from content. On the GPT-2 schema, the S+R subset reaches oracle recall@30 of 0.411 , while random partitions of the same per-component text into two groups—identical content, structured arbitrarily—reach mean oracle recall of 0.20 –0.22 (p < 0.01 across three baseline configurations; Fig. 4D). Embedding model and content are held fixed; only the field-level structure varies. Together with the BM25 baselines (VAE/CNN Precision@5: 18.0%/20.4%; GPT-2 oracle recall@30: 0.143, below ran-dom at 0.304; Table 42, App. N),                                        

> Table 2. CNN sufficiency and necessity vs. matched-budget ran-dom selection. Sufficiency: k=8 filters, α∈ { 30 ,50 ,70 },n=270
> trials, success =target flip with ∆ptarget >0.1. Necessity: k=8 ,
> 1,000 correctly classified images per class, ablation =zero post-ReLU. Random matched-budget uses 3seeds. Direction Selection rule Result ∆random Sufficiency A. MU + primary-class rule 76.3% +69 .6pp C3. S-selectivity, no rule 58.9% +52 .2pp C4. Raw-activation selectivity 58.9% +52 .2pp R. Random 6.7% —Necessity B. MU + primary-class rule −38 .3pp +34 .7pp Rnec . Random −3.6pp —
> Figure 2. Necessity-direction validation. (a) Primary filters are necessary (larger drop); (b) necessity increases with k.

5.2. H2 — causal mediation on the CNN 

H2 concerns the stricter MIB notion: not whether the re-sponse reflects retrieved evidence, but whether retrieved components causally mediate the behaviour, established by both sufficiency (intervening on the components repro-duces the targeted behaviour) and necessity (ablating them disrupts behaviour under natural inputs). We test both di-rections on the CNN under matched-budget comparisons against random selection. 

Sufficiency: targeted amplification flips predictions. 

For each of 90 source-to-target class pairs, we retrieve target-associated filters via RAG over the MUs, amplify their post-ReLU activations by α, and require ∆ptarget > 0.1

with the prediction switching to the target. At k=8 filters, 

α ∈ { 30 , 50 , 70 }, n=270 trials, RAG-retrieved filters flip the prediction in 76.3% of trials, against 6.7% for matched-budget random filters under identical conditions ( +69 .6pp; Table 2, row A vs R). 

Decomposing sufficiency. The matched-budget gap de-composes (Table 2): the typed primary-class rule contributes 

+17 .4pp on top of selectivity-only ranking (A vs C3) op-erating over a faithfully-stored S (C3 = C4 at 58 .9% ); the 

+52 .2pp gap from random to selectivity-only confirms am-plification does not mechanically dominate this CNN. 5Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability plane 

> auto
> bird
> cat
> deer
> dog
> frog
> horse
> ship
> truck

Target Class                                                                                 

> plane
> auto
> bird
> cat
> deer
> dog
> frog
> horse
> ship
> truck
> Source Class
> 074 66 80 49 58 51 58 37
> 100 100 100 100 61 100 100 59 43
> 34 032 32 029 000
> 100 53 100 100 60 100 100 70 47
> 31 0028 19 0031 0
> 71 37 63 59 68 68 58 56 0
> 42 31 30 29 36 00025
> 100 42 100 100 100 51 100 60 33
> 63 47 68 65 81 46 60 50 0
> 100 46 100 100 100 66 100 100 59
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Success Rate (%)

Figure 3. Per-pair success rate, averaged across the full am-plification sweep α ∈ {10 , . . . , 100 } (vs. Table 2’s protocol 

{30 , 50 , 70 } for the H2 headline). Failures cluster within-category, tracing filter-selectivity overlap. Full breakdown: App. E. 

Necessity: ablating retrieved filters disrupts natural classification. For each class c, we identify 100 natural CIFAR-10 test images that the unmodified model classi-fies correctly as c, then zero the post-ReLU activations of the top-k=8 primary-class filters retrieved by Eq. 3 and re-evaluate. Across all 10 classes, retrieved-filter ablation drops top-1 accuracy from 100% to 61 .7% (a 38 .3pp drop), while random-filter ablation drops accuracy by only 3.6pp (Table 2, B vs R nec ). The 34 .7pp aggregate gap holds for 

9/10 classes (Fig. 2a). The remaining class, deer, exhibits a 4.7pp gap; deer’s stored selectivity is distributed across a smaller pool of 24 selective filters (vs. 29 –57 for other classes), and the MU correctly surfaces this as a flatter top-

m distribution in S. The necessity gap scales monotonically with k (+11 .2pp at k=3 , +25 .3pp at k=5 , +34 .7pp at k=8 ;Fig. 2b), indicating distributed mediation by populations of filters rather than single units, with the typed primary-class rule ordering the population by mediation strength. 

Joint reading. Sufficiency (+69 .6pp) and necessity (+34 .7pp) jointly establish MIB causal faithfulness for the CNN; the per-pair heatmap (Fig. 3) shows failures clus-ter within-category, tracing filter-selectivity overlap. Per-α

marginalisation and the extended-search result ( 88 /90 pairs after post-hoc α tuning over resistant pairs; the primary H2 figure remains 76 .3% ) in App. E.3. 

5.3. Decomposition mechanics on the GPT-2 schema 

With T populated automatically from attention-pattern fea-tures (induction/copying scores, QK and OV circuit norms, attention-position ratios), we use the GPT-2 instantiation to ask whether the six-field decomposition itself has identifi-able internal structure. Three findings emerge. 

Minimal-optimal core. Leave-one-out ablation on the full six-field schema (Fig. 4A) identifies S as necessary (p=.028 ); E is removed without loss and—when re-added on top of the G+S+R subset—actively interferes with retrieval ( p < 10 −8), as does D (p=.028 ). Within the 

G+S+R subset (Fig. 4C), S (p < 10 −10 ) and R (p=.019 )are both necessary while G is redundant ( p=.102 ). The progressive curve (Fig. 4B) peaks at G+S+R (recall@30 

= 0 .375 ) and degrades when D, E, or T are added to that subset, before rebounding at S+R alone to 0.411 —while the full ESRDGT schema reaches only 0.196 , confirming that interference from E, D, T is substantial (App. N). The minimal-optimal core of the decomposition is therefore 

S+R.

Non-redundancy and weak anti-correlation. Three mea-sures of pairwise field overlap—description embedding sim-ilarity, head-ranking correlation, and top-k Jaccard—all agree that no field pair exceeds the redundancy threshold (Fig. 5A,C). The two necessary fields, S and R, retrieve 

weakly anti-correlated head rankings: their head-ranking correlation is ρ=−0.20 (Fig. 5B), the strongest negative correlation in the matrix. This explains why their union is maximally informative: S and R pull in different direc-tions, so combining them spans more of the relevant space than either alone. Per-field singleton retrieval and the field– function dissociation between set-recall and first-rank MRR are in App. I; field-level oracle discriminability is in App. H. 

5.4. Schema transfer to attention heads 

The protocol absorbs attention-head primitives without mod-ification: the T field encodes induction scores, copying scores, QK/OV circuit norms, and attention-position ratios extracted from each head’s attention matrices over a refer-ence corpus (App. F.4). Across four IOI-style behaviours, retrieved heads beat matched-budget random retrieval by 

2.0–4.5× on oracle recall metrics. At k=30 , S+R retrieval recovers 5/7 of the canonical IOI L7–9 name-mover heads of Wang et al. (2023)—an oracle recall@30 of 0.411 2 and a 1.75 × lift over random matched-budget retrieval. The required pivot from surface features (POS tags, syntactic dependencies) to functional features (induction, copying, IOI primitives) when populating S defines a principled S-primitive selection procedure: the schema is invariant across architectures while S-content is chosen functionally, vali-dated by reference-set recovery ( 3/16 → 13 /16 heads; App. F.4). 

> 2

Averaged over 8 query paraphrases. This is set membership with the canonical oracle, not causal restoration; see the path-patching scope paragraph below. 

6Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability                                                   

> Figure 4. Per-field ablation on the GPT-2 ESRDGT schema identifies S+Ras the minimal-optimal core. (A) Leave-one-out on the full six-field schema: E(p < 10 −8) and D(p=.028 ) actively interfere when present; S(p=.028 ) is necessary; R,G,Tnon-significant individually. (B) Progressive field addition: recall@30 reaches 0.375 at G+S+R, drops in the interference zone when D,E, or T
> are added to that subset, and is highest at S+Ralone ( 0.411 ). (C) Leave-one-out within the G+S+Rsubset: S(p < 10 −10 ) and R
> (p=.019 ) are both necessary; Gis redundant within the subset. (D) S+Rversus random partitions of the same per-component text:
> S+Rrecall@30 = 0 .411 beats three random-partition baselines ( μ∈[0 .20 ,0.22] ) at p < 0.01 across 10 seeds, isolating the structural contribution from content.

Path-patching scope. Framework-retrieved heads at 

k=30 collectively restore a non-trivial fraction of the IOI logit-difference ( frac restored = 0 .41 vs random 

0.23 ), consistent with the distributed nature of GPT-2’s IOI circuit (the 7 oracle heads themselves restore only 0.12 ). Per-field causal enrichment under path-patching is not sig-nificant after Bonferroni correction (App. G); the frame-work’s contribution on GPT-2 is at the retrieval layer, not strict per-head causal mediation. 

Response-faithfulness sanity check. A grounding-pipeline check ( n=15 raters, 612 ratings, scores > 4.0/5.0;Qwen3-8B, Claude-Opus, and GPT-5.1 all reach >94% fac-tual accuracy on identical retrieved context) is in App. K. 

## 6. Discussion and Limitations 

Two kinds of faithfulness. We separate response faith-fulness (does the generated response reflect retrieved ev-idence?) from causal faithfulness (Mueller et al., 2024) (do identified components causally mediate the behaviour under both directions of intervention?). Sec. 5.2 targets the latter and is the stronger claim; Sec. 5.4’s response-faithfulness check addresses the former. The four-way de-composition (Table 2) localises the framework’s H2 contri-bution to the typed primary-class rule (Eq. 3) operating over a faithfully-stored S; it does not trace causal paths, identify confounding interactions, or rule out multiple-mediator ef-fects. Integrating MU-level evidence with circuit and SAE analyses (Lieberum et al., 2024; Conmy et al., 2023)—so retrieved units carry attribution-graph neighbourhoods or sparse-feature labels in S/R—tightens the claim without changing the interface. 

Transformer instantiation (GPT-2). The GPT-2 instanti-ation does three kinds of work simultaneously: structural-isolation test for H1 via random-partition controls (Sec. 5.1), per-field minimality and optimality with S+R as the irre-7Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability                  

> Figure 5. Field redundancy analysis on the GPT-2 ESRDGT schema. (A) Pairwise embedding cosine similarity. (B) Head-ranking Spearman correlation: Sand Rshow the strongest negative correlation ( ρ=−0.20 ), indicating weakly anti-correlated head rankings.
> (C) Top-khead-set Jaccard overlap. No field pair exceeds redundancy thresholds, confirming functional distinctness. The S↔Rweak anti-correlation explains their complementarity, as they retrieve largely-disjoint head sets and jointly cover a larger functional space.

ducible core (Sec. 5.3), and schema transfer to attention heads beating matched-budget random by 2.0–4.5× across four behaviours (Sec. 5.4, App. F.4). Each depends on auto-matic population of T with attention-pattern primitives—no architecture-specific retrieval logic. Two qualifications: the concept vocabulary populating S had to pivot from surface linguistic features ( 3/16 reference heads recovered) to MI-derived functional features (attention-to-induction-target, IO-position, previous-token, self; 13 /16 recovered), validat-ing a principled S-primitive selection procedure for trans-formers; and on the strict path-patching causal-mediation test, framework retrieval at k=30 collectively restores 0.409 

of the IOI logit-difference but does not show per-head causal enrichment (App. G). The framework demonstrates set-overlap retrieval with the canonical IOI circuit, not strict per-head causal mediation; the latter would require retrieval criteria optimised directly for path-patching scores, which the current T field does not provide. All five GPT-2 exper-iments were pre-registered with SHA-256-hashed predic-tions before outcomes were computed. 

Limitations. Scale. No frontier-scale Transformer valida-tion; SAE-based S (Lieberum et al., 2024) is the natural next step. Polysemanticity. Top-concept S is inadequate for poly-semantic units; SAE primitives would address this. Concept vocabulary. Resolution is conditional on C matched to the architecture; label-free domains need auto-labelling (Oikari-nen & Weng, 2023) or SAE features as S replacements. 

Per-head causal mediation on GPT-2. Set-overlap with the canonical IOI circuit, not strict per-head path-patching en-richment (App. G); the IOI circuit is distributed (the 7-head oracle itself restores only 11 .7% of the logit-diff) and T

encodes attention-pattern features correlated with but not equal to path-patching scores. VAE causal. Manipulation is qualitative; quantitative metrics for generative edits are fu-ture work. Queries. Programmatic, not user-elicited (Orgad et al., 2024). 

## 7. Conclusion 

We proposed Manifestation Units, a typed schema 

(E, S, R, D, G, T ) that organises component-level inter-pretability analyses into structured, automatically populated tuples exposed through hybrid retrieval — creating a com-posable representation layer between per-component statis-tics and downstream use. Two hypotheses were confirmed under matched-budget controls. H1 : typed structure drives retrieval independently of content — structured retrieval reaches Precision@5 of 89 .6% /96 .8% (VAE/CNN) versus 

18 .0% /20 .4% for BM25 over identical statistics, and S+R

beats random partitions of the same GPT-2 text at p< 0.01 .

H2 : on the CNN, retrieved components causally mediate the targeted behaviour ( 76 .3% sufficiency under amplifi-cation, −38 .3pp accuracy under ablation, both well above matched-random); on the GPT-2 schema the analogue is the minimal-optimal core ( S+R), with per-head causal en-richment under path-patching not significant after Bonfer-roni correction (App. G). On the GPT-2 schema, ablation reveals that S and R form an irreducible core, G is redun-dant within it, and E/D actively interfere when added; the schema further recovers known IOI circuit members and beats matched-budget random retrieval by 2.0–4.5× across four behaviours. The immediate next steps are SAE-feature 

S for polysemantic components, frontier-scale validation, and label-free concept vocabularies, none of which require changing the (E, S, R, D, G ) interface or its extension (T ).8Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability 

## Impact Statement 

Manifestation Units are interpretability infrastructure , not new analyses or new capabilities: a typed representation layer over outputs that already exist in the field’s toolkit. We expect three groups to benefit. Interpretability researchers 

gain a composable substrate for organising per-component statistics across studies; the schema is designed to accept SAE-feature labels (Lieberum et al., 2024; Cunningham et al., 2024), attribution-graph neighbourhoods (Conmy et al., 2023), and steering or activation-patching primitives as future S/R/G content without changing the interface. 

Educators and students gain a natural-language interface to model internals that does not require scripting around per-paper notebooks, lowering the entry cost for engaging with mechanistic findings. Practitioners doing model au-dit and debugging gain retrieval-grounded evidence—every cited statistic traces to a stored field value—which reduces the cost of working with neural-network internals and sup-ports reproducibility. We see lowering these access costs as broadly aligned with safer interpretability practice. Three scope caveats are worth stating explicitly. (i) Do-main. The β-VAE manipulation experiments edit facial attributes (smiling, eyeglasses) on CelebA. Reconstruction quality is far below current generative baselines, but the same retrieval-and-intervention pattern, applied to higher-quality face models, would warrant separate consideration as face-attribute manipulation tooling; we do not develop or release such tooling. (ii) Inherited limits. The framework inherits the resolution of its underlying analyses; extending to frontier models requires SAE-based or similarly scaled 

S-primitives that this paper does not provide. (iii) Settings. 

All reported results are post-hoc analyses on small-scale models—our own β-VAE on CelebA and CNN on CIFAR-10, together with the publicly available GPT-2 small; we make no claim of readiness for safety-critical deployment, and recommend domain-specific evaluation, access controls, and auditing for any real-world use. We adopt and recommend two methodological practices for interpretability infrastructure work: pre-registration of experiments via cryptographically hashed predictions be-fore outcomes are computed (all five GPT-2 experiments here), and explicit reporting of negative results (the per-field path-patching null, App. G). Both reduce the risk that in-terpretability tooling overclaims relative to its evidence—a property of the field worth normalising. 

## References 

Bau, D., Zhou, B., Khosla, A., Oliva, A., and Torralba, A. Network dissection: Quantifying interpretability of deep visual representations. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pp. 6541–6549, 2017. Belinkov, Y. Probing classifiers: Promises, shortcomings, and advances. Computational Linguistics , 48(1):207–219, 2022. Cicchetti, D. V. Guidelines, criteria, and rules of thumb for evaluating normed and standardized assessment instru-ments in psychology. Psychological Assessment , 6(4): 284–290, 1994. Conmy, A., Mavor-Parker, A., Lynch, A., Heimersheim, S., and Garriga-Alonso, A. Towards automated circuit discovery for mechanistic interpretability. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2023. Cunningham, H., Ewart, A., Riggs, L., Huben, R., and Sharkey, L. Sparse autoencoders find highly interpretable features in language models. International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. Edge, D. et al. From local to global: A graph rag ap-proach to query-focused summarization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16130 , 2024. Elhage, N., Nanda, N., Olsson, C., Henighan, T., Joseph, N., Mann, B., Askell, A., Bai, Y., Chen, A., Conerly, T., DasSarma, N., Drain, D., Ganguli, D., Hatfield-Dodds, Z., Hernandez, D., Jones, A., Kernion, J., Lovitt, L., Ndousse, K., Amodei, D., Brown, T., Clark, J., Kaplan, J., McCandlish, S., and Olah, C. A mathematical framework for transformer circuits. Transformer Circuits Thread ,2021. Elhage, N., Hume, T., Olsson, C., Schiefer, N., Henighan, T., Kravec, S., Hatfield-Dodds, Z., Lasenby, R., Drain, D., Chen, C., Grosse, R., McCandlish, S., Kaplan, J., Amodei, D., Wattenberg, M., and Olah, C. Toy models of superposition. Transformer Circuits Thread , 2022. Es, S., James, J., Espinosa-Anke, L., and Schockaert, S. Ragas: Automated evaluation of retrieval augmented gen-eration. In EACL , 2024. F ´evry, T., Soares, L. B., FitzGerald, N., Choi, E., and Kwiatkowski, T. Entities as experts: Sparse memory access with entity supervision. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing , pp. 4937–4951, 2020. Fleiss, J. L. Measuring nominal scale agreement among many raters. Psychological Bulletin , 76(5):378–382, 1971. Goldowsky-Dill, N., MacLeod, C., Sato, L., and Arora, A. Localizing model behavior with path patching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05969 , 2023. 9Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability 

Graham, Y., Baldwin, T., Moffat, A., and Zobel, J. Ac-curate evaluation of segment-level machine translation metrics. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pp. 1183–1191, 2015. Heimersheim, S. and Nanda, N. How to use and interpret activation patching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.15255 ,2024. Hoffman, R. R., Mueller, S. T., Klein, G., and Litman, J. Measures for explainable ai: Explanation goodness, user satisfaction, mental models, curiosity, trust, and human-ai task performance. Frontiers in Computer Science , 5, 2023. Krippendorff, K. Computing Krippendorff’s alpha-reliability. Departmental Papers (ASC) , pp. 43, 2011. Landis, J. R. and Koch, G. G. The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data. Biometrics , pp. 159–174, 1977. Li, X., Liu, Z., Xiong, C., Yu, S., Gu, Y., Liu, Z., and Yu, G. Structure-aware language model pretraining improves dense retrieval on structured data. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 ,pp. 11560–11574, 2023. Lieberum, T., Rajamanoharan, S., Conmy, A., Smith, L., Sonnerat, N., Varma, V., Kramar, J., Dragan, A., Shah, R., and Nanda, N. Gemma scope: Open sparse autoen-coders everywhere all at once on gemma 2. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.05147 , 2024. Meng, K., Bau, D., Andonian, A., and Belinkov, Y. Locat-ing and editing factual associations in gpt. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35, 2022. Mueller, A., Brinkmann, J., Li, M., Marks, S., Pal, K., Prakash, N., Rager, C., Sankaranarayanan, A., Sharma, A. S., Sun, J., Todd, E., Bau, D., and Belinkov, Y. Mib: A mechanistic interpretability benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.13151 , 2024. Oikarinen, T. and Weng, T.-W. CLIP-Dissect: Automatic description of neuron representations in deep vision net-works. In International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations , 2023. Olsson, C., Elhage, N., Nanda, N., Joseph, N., DasSarma, N., Henighan, T., Mann, B., Askell, A., Bai, Y., Chen, A., Conerly, T., Drain, D., Ganguli, D., Hatfield-Dodds, Z., Hernandez, D., Johnston, S., Jones, A., Kernion, J., Lovitt, L., Ndousse, K., Amodei, D., Brown, T., Clark, J., Kaplan, J., McCandlish, S., and Olah, C. In-context learn-ing and induction heads. Transformer Circuits Thread ,2022. Orgad, H. et al. Interpretability can be actionable. 

Actionable Interpretability Workshop , 2024. https: //actionable-interpretability-guide. github.io/paper.pdf .Post, M. A call for clarity in reporting BLEU scores. In Pro-ceedings of the Third Conference on Machine Translation: Research Papers , pp. 186–191, 2018. Shrout, P. E. and Fleiss, J. L. Intraclass correlations: uses in assessing rater reliability. Psychological Bulletin , 86(2): 420–428, 1979. Wang, K., Variengien, A., Conmy, A., Shlegeris, B., and Steinhardt, J. Interpretability in the wild: a circuit for indirect object identification in gpt-2 small. International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. Yasunaga, M., Bosselut, A., Ren, H., Zhang, X., Manning, C. D., Liang, P., and Leskovec, J. Deep bidirectional language-knowledge graph pretraining. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 35, pp. 37309–37323, 2022. Zhang, T., Kishore, V., Wu, F., Weinberger, K. Q., and Artzi, Y. Bertscore: Evaluating text generation with bert. In 

ICLR , 2020. Zheng, L., Chiang, W.-L., Sheng, Y., Zhuang, S., Wu, Z., Zhuang, Y., Lin, Z., Li, Z., Li, D., Xing, E., et al. Judg-ing llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. In 

NeurIPS , 2023. 10 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability 

## Appendix Navigation 

Table 3. Navigation map: each main-paper section to its supporting appendix. Section and appendix references are clickable. 

Main paper App. Provides 

All evaluations A Evaluation-to-contribution mapping (C1–C3). §3.1 MUs / extraction B Field-level math, thresholds ( m, r, τsyn , τant ), three-level analysis, sensitivity. §3.2 retrieval C RAG architecture, templates, indexing, entity extraction, prompts. §3.2 SLM configuration D SLM parameter studies (temperature, max tokens, prompt strategy). §3.3 causal probe / §5.2 H2 E 90 CNN class-pair manipulations, RAG-vs-random, optimisation, filter overlap; VAE qualitative section. §4 applications, §6 GPT-2 F Architectures, dataset details, MU counts; per-architecture instantiation table; GPT-2 per-behaviour manipulation summary; CNN categorical structure; GPT-2 per-layer IOI mediation; concept-vocabulary pivot details; embedding stability across encoders; field-merging falsification. §5.4 path-patching / §6 limitations G Path-patching causal-mediation analysis, budget-matched comparison, per-field causal-enrichment null result. §5.3 decomposition mechanics H Field-level oracle discriminability (Mann–Whitney, hand vs. learned modes). §5.3 decomposition mechanics I Per-field singleton retrieval; field–function dissociation (recall vs. MRR). §5 setup J Formal metric definitions (retrieval, generation, semantic, faithfulness). §5.4 response-faithfulness sanity check K Human study (612 ratings, expertise-stratified) with inter-rater reliability analy-sis. §5.4 response-faithfulness sanity check L LLM-as-judge full comparison tables (Claude-Opus, GPT-5.1). §5.1 H1 M Automatic-evaluation table across LLM backends and k ∈ { 5, 10 , 20 }.§5.1 H1 N 14-configuration ablation (VAE) / 7-configuration ablation (CNN) with tradi-tional retrieval baselines. 

Reproducibility anchors. The two anonymous interactive demos (https://manifestation-xai. github.io/manifestation-transformers/ and https://manifestation-xai.github.io/ manifestation-cnn/ ) walk through the extraction–retrieval–generation–manipulation pipeline with every intermediate output visible. 

## A. Evaluation-to-Contribution Mapping 

This appendix maps each evaluation to the core contributions stated in the main paper (C1–C3). We also report manipulation experiments as additional validation evidence (Table 5), consistent with our framing in Sec. 3.4 that manipulation is used primarily as a validation mechanism. 

Contributions summary. 

• C1: Manifestation Units, a structured representation protocol (E, S, R, D, G, T ) that transforms statistical patterns from neural network analysis into retrievable, groundable knowledge units. • C2: A template-grounded hybrid retrieval architecture combining entity-aware exact matching with semantic search, enabling faithful natural language access to component-level knowledge. • C3: Empirical evidence that structured representation and hybrid retrieval each materially contribute in the studied settings: ablations show retrieval precision drops to near-zero when either component is removed; the response-faithfulness check is consistent across user expertise levels. 

## B. Knowledge Extraction Details 

This appendix provides implementation details for the three-level analysis described in Sec. 3.3. 11 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability 

Table 4. Evaluation-to-contribution mapping. 

Evaluation What we did What we wanted to see Supports 

Cross-architecture con-sistency Applied the same pipeline to a β-VAE (512 dims) and a CNN (224 filters). Whether the representation+retrieval interface generalizes across architectures. C1 

Hypothesis validation (main paper). 

Structural isolation (H1, GPT-2) Compared S+R retrieval against random parti-tions of identical per-component text on GPT-2 attention heads (Fig. 4D; p < 0.01 across 10 seeds and 3 baseline configurations). Whether typed structure beats arbitrary parti-tioning of the same content. C1, C3 Causal mediation (H2, CNN) Targeted amplification (k=8 , α ∈{30 , 50 , 70 }, n=270 ) and natural-image ablation, vs. matched-budget random (Ta-ble 2). Whether retrieved components causally medi-ate the targeted behaviour (MIB sense: suffi-ciency + necessity). C1, C3 Per-field ablation (H2, GPT-2) Leave-one-out and progressive field addition on the ESRDGT schema, plus field-merging falsification under coarser groupings (Fig. 4A– C, Fig. 25). Identify the minimal-optimal field combina-tion; falsify the granularity choice. C1 IOI circuit recovery (GPT-2) Set-overlap between framework-retrieved heads at k ∈ { 7, 15 , 30 } and the canonical IOI L7–9 name-mover heads of Wang et al. (2023). Cross-architecture schema transfer to attention heads. C1 Path-patching scope (GPT-2) Per-field causal enrichment under path-patching, Bonferroni-corrected across fields and retrieval strategies (App. G). Honest disclosure of where retrieval enrich-ment does not translate to per-head causal en-richment. C1 (scope) Automatic evaluation (single-turn) Evaluated retrieval, generation, semantic sim-ilarity, and faithfulness metrics across k ∈{5, 10 , 20 } on dims/filters queries. Correct retrieval of relevant units and grounded generation. C2 LLM-as-judge evalua-tion Claude-Opus and GPT-5.1 rated multi-turn con-versations (5 turns) on 7 metrics (Comprehen-sibility, Faithfulness, Correctness, Usefulness, Specificity, Trustworthiness, Coherence). Conversational quality under automated judg-ing. C2 Human evaluation 15 evaluators across 3 expertise levels (Begin-ner, Intermediate, Expert), 612 assessments to-tal (315 VAE + 297 CNN), multi-turn (5 turns), same 7 metrics. Usefulness and faithfulness across user exper-tise. C2 SLM parameter studies Varied temperature (0.0–1.0), max tokens (256– 2000), and prompting strategy (Basic, De-tailed, Chain-of-Thought) while holding re-trieval fixed. Robustness of grounded generation to decod-ing/prompt choices. C2 Ablation: retrieval com-ponents Ablated query reformulation, reranking, boost-ing, over-retrieval, exact matching, and index composition (dims-only, Q&A-only, interactions-only). Which retrieval components materially affect performance. C2 Ablation: structured vs. unstructured Replaced Manifestation Units with unstruc-tured prose containing identical statistics. Whether structured (E, S, R, D, G, T ) repre-sentation is essential. C3 Ablation: entity-aware retrieval Disabled exact matching (semantic-only) and compared against exact-only retrieval. Whether hybrid retrieval is necessary for mixed identifier/concept queries. C3 SLM vs. frontier LLMs Compared Qwen3-8B against Claude-Opus and GPT-5.1 on identical automatic metrics with same retrieved context. Whether smaller models suffice when properly grounded. C3 

B.1. Parameter Settings 

Table 6 summarizes the key parameters used in our experiments. 12 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability 

Table 5. Additional behavioral validation (not claimed as a separate contribution). The 97 .8% figure reflects post-hoc α-tuning optimisation over resistant pairs; the primary H2 evaluation uses the fixed-protocol result of 76 .3% (Table 2, main paper). 

Evaluation What we did What we wanted to see Purpose 

CNN manipulation (au-tomatic) For 90 source →target class pairs, conducted 540 tests (10 classes × 9 targets × 6 ampli-fication levels: α ∈ { 10 , 30 , 50 , 70 , 90 , 100 }

). Retrieved target-associated filters via natu-ral language queries and amplified activations. For 25 initially resistant pairs, applied system-atic configuration search while holding the re-trieved filter set fixed, resolving 23 additional pairs. Initial success: 72.2% (65/90 pairs). Fi-nal success: 97.8% (88/90 pairs) after optimization. Strong gaps vs. random baselines, indicating retrieved compo-nents are causally relevant. Only 2 resis-tant pairs remain (airplane →automobile, ship →truck). Validation VAE manipulation (hu-man) Human evaluation of natural-language attribute edits (e.g., “make smile”, “add eyeglasses”) via latent dimension modifications guided by retrieved units. Metrics: Visual Faithful-ness (1–5), Degree of Change (1–5), Identity Preserved (Yes/No/Partial), Artifact Quality (None/Mild/Moderate/Severe). Perceptible, targeted edits with high iden-tity preservation, noting reconstruction limitations inherent to VAE decoder qual-ity. Validation 

Table 6. Parameter settings for knowledge extraction. 

Parameter VAE (CelebA) CNN (CIFAR-10) Top-m concepts per component 5 3Top-r relationships per component 10 10 Synergistic threshold τsyn 0.7 0.7 Antagonistic threshold τant −0.5 −0.5 Clustering linkage Ward’s Ward’s Clustering distance 1 − | ρij | 1 − | ρij |

Number of clusters 20 per-layer 

B.2. Level 1: Individual Semantics Activation extraction. For each component, we compute a scalar activation per sample by spatially averaging its post-ReLU feature map (CNN) or spatially averaging the latent activation (VAE). All correlations and statistics are computed over N

test samples ( N = 1 ,000 for VAE, N = 10 ,000 for CNN). 

VAE (CelebA). For each latent dimension d ∈ { 1, . . . , 512 } and attribute a ∈ { 1, . . . , 40 }, we compute Pearson correlation: 

sd,a = corr (¯ z·,d , a) (4) where ¯z·,d ∈ RN is the spatially-averaged activation of dimension d across N test samples, and a ∈ { 0, 1}N is the binary attribute vector. We retain the top-m attributes by |sd,a | for each dimension. 

CNN (CIFAR-10). For each filter f and class c ∈ { 1, . . . , 10 }, we first compute class-wise mean activations μf,c over the validation set and normalize to obtain the distribution: 

pf (c) = μf,c 

P 

> c′

μf,c ′

. (5) We then compute class selectivity as: 

sf,c = 1 − H(pf )log(10) (6) where H(·) is entropy. This entropy-based selectivity is 0 when activations are uniform across classes and approaches 1 when concentrated on a single class. We retain the top-m classes by selectivity for each filter. 13 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability 

B.3. Level 2: Pairwise Relationships Formal definition of Nr (k). Let ρki denote the Pearson correlation between the activations of components k and i across the dataset: 

ρki = corr (ak, ai) (7) where ak, ai ∈ RN are activation vectors across N samples. The neighbor set Nr (k) is defined as: 

Nr (k) = {i1, . . . , i r } ⊂ I \ { k} (8) where |ρk,i 1 | ≥ | ρk,i 2 | ≥ · · · ≥ | ρk,i r | and |ρk,i r | ≥ | ρk,j | for all j / ∈ N r (k). Ties are broken by component index (smaller index preferred). 

Relationship classification. We label relationships as synergistic , antagonistic , or independent using thresholds τsyn and 

τant :

tki =



synergistic if ρki > τ syn 

antagonistic if ρki < τ ant 

independent otherwise (9) 

Computation and storage. We compute correlations using minibatch accumulation and store only the top-r neighbors per component. Full pairwise matrices are retained only for analysis layers with ≤ 512 components. For VAEs, this yields a 

512 × 512 correlation matrix. For CNNs, we compute both within-layer matrices (e.g., 32 × 32 for Conv1) and cross-layer matrices (e.g., 32 × 64 for Conv1 →Conv2). 

B.4. Level 3: Collective Organization VAE: Semantic families. We cluster using Ward’s linkage on the distance dij = 1 − | ρij |. The number of clusters (20) was determined by dendrogram inspection and silhouette analysis. Each dimension is assigned a cluster ID stored in D.

VAE: Effective dimensionality. We compute the effective dimensionality as: dim eff (α) = min 

(

k :

Pki=1 λi

Pni=1 λi

> α 

)

(10) where λi are eigenvalues of the covariance matrix of latent activations across the dataset, sorted in descending order, and 

α = 0 .95 . This measures how many dimensions capture 95% of the variance. 

CNN: Cross-layer dependencies. For consecutive layers l and l′, we compute the cross-layer correlation matrix: 

C(l→l′) = [ ρij ]i∈Il,j ∈Il′ (11) where Il and Il′ are the filter sets for layers l and l′. Strong correlations indicate feature dependencies across the hierarchy. These dependency scores are stored in D.

## C. Retrieval Implementation Details 

Figure 7 illustrates the complete RAG conversational architecture for the VAE system. 

C.1. Template Structure 

Each Manifestation Unit Mk = ( Ek, S k, R k, D k, G k) is converted to natural language via deterministic templates. These templates provide grounded views of structured fields: each rendered statement is a direct instantiation of values stored in the unit. 14 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability    

> Figure 6. Comparison of structured Manifestation Unit representation (left) versus unstructured natural language (right) for the same dimension. The structured format (E, S, R, D, G )provides typed fields enabling exact-match retrieval on entity identifiers and faithful numeric grounding. The unstructured format buries the same information in prose, causing retrieval failures on entity-specific queries (e.g., “dimension 0” appears throughout the text but cannot be reliably matched).

C.1.1. S TRUCTURED VS . U NSTRUCTURED REPRESENTATIONS 

A key design decision in MANIFESTATION is the use of structured templated documents derived from the five-tuple representation (E, S, R, D, G ), rather than unstructured narrative text. Figure 8 illustrates this distinction for the CNN system. 

Structured representation (MANIFESTATION). Each Manifestation Unit generates multiple specialized documents, with each document corresponding to a specific component of the five-tuple: • Eu (Entity): Unique identifier enabling exact-match retrieval (e.g., “Filter 0 in conv1”) • Su (Summary): Primary semantic role and statistical properties • Du (Technical Properties): Activation statistics, sparsity, class-specific responses • Ru (Relationships): Synergistic partnerships and correlation strengths • Gu (Manipulation Guide): Actionable instructions for enhancing or suppressing filter behavior This decomposition enables field-specific retrieval : queries about relationships retrieve relationship documents, while queries about manipulation retrieve guidance documents, improving precision and reducing irrelevant context. 15 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability    

> Figure 7. RAG conversational architecture for the VAE system Conversational System. A user query (“What does dimension 63 encode?”) flows through: (1) query reformulation with state-based context tracking, (2) entity extraction detecting query type (dimension, family, correlation), (3) hybrid retrieval combining exact match, semantic search, and family-aware retrieval across four FAISS indices, (4) conversation state management tracking entities and focus, and (5) grounded response generation via Qwen3-8B. The output cites specific statistics from retrieved Manifestation Units (correlation ρ= 0 .303 , variance 0.0174, relationship counts).

Unstructured representation (Baseline). In contrast, unstructured baselines concatenate all information about an entity into free-form narrative text. As shown in the right panel of Figure 8, this approach loses the explicit field boundaries that enable targeted retrieval. Queries must rely entirely on semantic similarity, which struggles to distinguish between conceptually related but functionally distinct information (e.g., confusing “what class does filter X detect?” with “what filters detect class Y?”). C.1.2. T EMPLATED DOCUMENTS 

Rather than indexing a single concatenated text per unit, we generate multiple templated documents per unit , each specializing in a distinct access pattern. This enables fine-grained retrieval where queries about encoding retrieve summary documents while queries about redundancy retrieve redundancy-specific documents. 

VAE template fields. For the VAE system (512 latent dimensions), each Manifestation Unit generates 4 templated documents: • summary : Primary attribute ( c∗), correlation strength, semantic family membership, variance characteristics. 

> “Dimension 63 primarily encodes ‘Wearing Lipstick’ with correlation 0.303. Family: Wearing Lipstick. Variance: 0.0174. Strong correlations: 368.”

• generation role : Role during generation, number of strong correlations, hub/peripheral classification. 

> “During face generation, this dimension primarily controls ‘Wearing Lipstick’. Hub dimension with 368 strong correla-tions across latent space.”

• redundancy notes : Very high correlations ( r > 0.9), redundant dimension IDs, pruning recommendations. 

> “This dimension has 156 very high correlations ( >0.9). Redundant with dimensions 320, 241, 310. Consider pruning for efficiency.”

• manipulation guide : How to manipulate the primary attribute, recommended co-manipulations. 16 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability 

Figure 8. Comparison of structured Manifestation Units (left) versus unstructured baseline (right) for CNN filter analysis. The structured representation decomposes knowledge into five specialized document types (Eu, S u, R u, D u, G u), enabling field-specific retrieval. The unstructured baseline concatenates all information into narrative paragraphs, losing explicit structure. “To manipulate ‘Wearing Lipstick’: adjust dimension 63. Co-manipulate correlated dimensions for stronger effect.” 

This yields 512 × 4 = 2 ,048 dimension-level template entries in the primary Dimension Index. 

CNN template fields. For the CNN system (224 filters: 32 in conv1, 64 in conv2, 128 in conv3), each unit generates up to 5 templated documents: • summary : Selectivity score, mean activation, top responding classes, layer role. 

“Filter 0 in conv1 is a general-purpose low-level feature detector. Selectivity: 0.16. Mean activation: 0.128.” 

• technical properties : Sparsity coefficient, activation statistics (mean, std, range). 

“Sparsity: 0.00 (dense activation). Std: 0.048. Activation range: [0.0, 0.31].” 

• class responses : Per-class activation statistics for CIFAR-10 classes. 

“Top responding classes: automobile ( μ=0.154, σ=0.045), frog ( μ=0.142), truck ( μ=0.138).” 

• relationships : Synergistic filter partnerships and correlation strengths (when present). 

“4 synergistic partners. Strongest: filter 16 ( r=0.75), filter 17 ( r=0.74), filter 3 ( r=0.71).” 

• manipulation guide : How to enhance/suppress filter response, partner filters for amplification. 

“To enhance automobile/frog detection: amplify filter 0. Co-amplify filters 16, 17 for stronger effect.” 

This yields 943 indexed template entries (not all filters have documented relationships). 17 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability  

> Table 7. Template variable instantiation by architecture.

Variable VAE CNN 

E “Dimension {d}” “Filter {f} in conv {l}”

c∗ Attribute name Class name 

s∗ Correlation value Selectivity score Fields per unit 4 5 (relationships optional) Total documents 2,048 (primary index) 943 

Document metadata. Each templated document stores metadata for retrieval and traceability: • Entity identifier : dimension id (VAE) or layer +filter pair (CNN) • Field type : Which template family this document instantiates • Text : Natural language description derived from structured fields • Numeric values : Original statistics for verbatim citation in responses Table 7 shows variable instantiation by architecture. 

C.2. RAG Architecture Details 

The MANIFESTATION framework employs distinct RAG architectures for single-turn retrieval queries and multi-turn conversational interactions. This section details the architectural components illustrated in Figure 9–11. C.2.1. S INGLE -T URN RETRIEVAL ARCHITECTURE 

Figure 9 illustrates the RAG architecture for single-turn queries in the VAE system. Given a query such as “What does dimension 63 encode?”, the system proceeds through the following stages: 

Query processing. The Query Reformulation module normalizes abbreviations and informal references (e.g., “dims” →

“dimension 63”). The Entity Extraction module then identifies explicit dimension IDs using pattern matching, classifying the query type (single dimension, multi-dimension comparison, attribute exploration, etc.). 

Hybrid retrieval. Three complementary retrieval strategies operate in parallel: 1. Exact Match : Direct lookup of extracted entity IDs in the dimension index, guaranteeing retrieval of the target Manifestation Unit when explicitly referenced. 2. Semantic Search : FAISS-based similarity search using sentence embeddings, enabling discovery of related dimensions even without explicit IDs. 3. Dynamic Allocation : Query-adaptive k selection based on query complexity—simple lookups retrieve fewer documents while comparative queries retrieve more. 

Multi-index search. The system maintains three specialized FAISS indices: • Dimensions : Primary index containing templated documents for all 512 VAE dimensions • Q&A : Pre-computed question-answer pairs for common query patterns • Interactions : Pairwise correlation and relationship documents 

Filtering and ranking. Retrieved documents undergo similarity thresholding (0.3), exact-match boosting (1.5 ×), and over-retrieval with reranking (5 × initial retrieval, then filter to final k). 18 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability  

> Figure 9. VAE single-turn RAG architecture. The system processes queries through reformulation and entity extraction, then applies hybrid retrieval (exact match, semantic search, dynamic allocation) across multiple FAISS indices before filtering and ranking results for generation.

C.2.2. C ONVERSATIONAL RAG A RCHITECTURE 

For multi-turn conversations, the architecture extends the single-turn system with state management and additional retrieval capabilities. Figure 10 and 11 illustrate these conversational architectures for VAE and CNN systems respectively. 

Extended VAE conversational architecture. As shown in Figure 10, the conversational system adds three key compo-nents: 1. Family Retrieval : Pre-computed mapping from semantic families (e.g., “Male”, “Wearing Lipstick”) to member dimensions, enabling efficient lookup for family-level queries. 2. Narratives Database : A fourth FAISS index containing pre-generated narrative summaries that provide high-level overviews of dimension families and interaction patterns. 3. Conversation State Management : Tracking of discussed entities, correlation pairs, and focus shifts to enable context-aware retrieval in follow-up turns. The state management component maintains: • current dimensions : Set of dimension IDs mentioned in conversation (e.g., {63, 501 })• current families : Semantic families under discussion (e.g., {Male })• last focus entity : Most recently discussed entity for pronoun resolution • discussed correlations : Pairs of dimensions whose relationships have been explored 

CNN conversational architecture. Figure 11 shows the analogous architecture for CNN filter analysis. The CNN system operates over a single database (Conv-Filter DB) organized by layer and filter, with 5 field types per filter. The conversation state tracks filter references across the three convolutional layers (conv1, conv2, conv3), maintaining focus for multi-turn exploration of filter hierarchies and cross-layer relationships. 19 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability  

> Figure 10. VAE conversational RAG architecture. Extends the single-turn system with family retrieval, a narratives database, and conversation state management for multi-turn context tracking.

C.3. Query Structures and Evaluation Protocol 

We evaluate the system using two complementary query types: single-turn retrieval queries and multi-turn conversational queries. Figure 12 and 13 illustrate the JSON structures for both query types. C.3.1. S INGLE -T URN RETRIEVAL QUERIES 

Single-turn queries test the system’s ability to retrieve and synthesize information from Manifestation Units in response to standalone questions. As shown in the left panels of Figure 12 and 13, each retrieval query specifies: • id : Unique query identifier (e.g., “T1 Q1” for CNN tier-1, “Q001” for VAE) • tier : Complexity level (1 = simple lookup, 2 = multi-entity, 3 = reasoning) • question : Natural language query text • target layer/target filter (CNN) or dimensions (VAE): Ground truth entities • target field : Expected template field (e.g., “technical properties”, “relationships”) • answer type : Expected format (float, integer, string, list) • expected format : Granularity of expected answer (exact value, exact count, description) Example CNN retrieval queries include:     

> “What is the mean activation value for Filter 0 in conv1?” →technical properties, float “How many synergistic relationships does Filter 1 in conv1 have?” →relationships, integer

Example VAE retrieval queries include:     

> “What does dimension 63 encode?” →pairwise interaction, dimensions [373, 255] “What does dimensions 299 and 335 encode?” →pairwise interaction, multi-dimension

20 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability 

Figure 11. CNN conversational RAG architecture. Processes filter queries through query reformulation and entity extraction, retrieves from a unified Conv-Filter database with 5 fields per filter, and maintains conversation state for multi-turn interactions. 

C.3.2. M ULTI -T URN CONVERSATIONAL QUERIES 

Conversational queries test the system’s ability to maintain context across multiple turns and resolve references to previously discussed entities. As shown in the right panels of Figure 12 and 13, each conversation specifies: • conversation id : Unique conversation identifier • category : Conversation type (e.g., “Dimension Exploration Multi Turn”) • turns : Ordered list of turn objects, each containing: 

– turn : Turn number (1-indexed) 

– question : Natural language query for this turn 

– filters (CNN) or dimensions (VAE): Entities relevant to this turn 

– target field : Expected template field for retrieval 

– requires context from : List of previous turn numbers needed to answer 

– context only : Whether answer should come only from conversation context Example CNN conversational sequence: 

Turn 1: “What is the mean activation value for Filter 0 in conv1?” Turn 2: “What is the sparsity value for it?” (requires context from turn 1) Turn 3: “Which class does it respond to most strongly?” (requires context from turns 1, 2) 

Example VAE conversational sequence: 

Turn 1: “What does dimension 63 encode?” Turn 2: “What about its correlation with dimension 501?” (requires context from turn 1) Turn 3: “Are there other dimensions in the same family?” (context only: true) Turn 4: “Are the dimensions related to dimension 542?” (requires context from turns 1, 2, 3) 

21 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability   

> Figure 12. CNN query structures. Left: Single-turn retrieval queries with explicit target specifications. Right: Multi-turn conversational queries with context dependencies indicated by requires context from .

The requires context from field enables automatic evaluation of context-dependent retrieval by specifying which previous turns must be considered to correctly answer the current turn. The context only flag indicates queries that should be answerable purely from accumulated conversation context without additional retrieval. 

C.4. Entity Extraction Patterns 

For hybrid retrieval, we use regular expressions to detect explicit component references in user queries. 

VAE patterns. 

• dimension[s]? \s*( \d+) matches “dimension 63” or “dimensions 63” • dim[s]? \s*( \d+) matches “dim 63” • \b( \d{1,3 })\b standalone numbers in dimension context 

CNN patterns. 

• filter \s*( \d+) \s*in \s*(conv[123]) matches “filter 5 in conv1” • (conv[123]) \s*filter \s*( \d+) matches “conv1 filter 5” • filters? \s*( \d+(?:, \s* \d+)*) \s*in \s*(conv[123]) matches filter lists When a pattern matches, the system performs exact lookup by iterating through documents and matching on the entity identifier field ( dimension id for VAE, layer +filter for CNN). Exact matches receive a similarity boost ( ×1.5)22 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability  

> Figure 13. VAE query structures. Left: Single-turn dimension queries categorized by relationship discovery type. Right: Multi-turn conversational queries demonstrating progressive exploration with context accumulation.

during retrieval ranking, ensuring that explicitly referenced components appear at the top of retrieved results. When no pattern matches, the system falls back to pure semantic search. 

C.5. Embedding, Indexing, and Retrieval Embedding model. We use Sentence-BERT ( all-MiniLM-L6-v2 , 384 dimensions) to embed templated docu-ments. We chose this lightweight sentence encoder for efficiency; preliminary experiments with larger encoders (e.g., 

all-mpnet-base-v2 ) yielded similar retrieval performance. 

Index structure. We use FAISS IndexFlatIP for similarity search. Document and query embeddings are L2-normalized, so inner product corresponds to cosine similarity. The VAE and CNN systems use different index architectures reflecting their scale and query patterns: 

VAE: Four specialized indices. The VAE system maintains four FAISS indices to support heterogeneous query types: 1. Dimension Index : 2,048 templated documents from Manifestation Units (512 dimensions × 4 fields). This is the primary index containing the core unit representations. 2. Q&A Index : 144 curated question-answer pairs covering general VAE architecture concepts, latent space interpretation, and common user questions. 23 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability 

3. Interaction Index : 2,607 documents describing pairwise dimension relationships, conditional dependencies, and correlation patterns between specific dimension pairs. 4. Narrative Index : 658 high-level analysis documents including semantic family summaries, variance distribution insights, and correlation cluster narratives. This yields a total of 5,457 indexed documents across all VAE indices. 

CNN: Single unified index. The CNN system uses a single FAISS index containing all 943 templated documents. The smaller scale (224 filters vs. 512 dimensions) and simpler relationship structure do not require index separation; all template fields are searchable within one index. 

Hybrid retrieval strategy. Given a user query q, retrieval proceeds as follows: 1. Entity extraction : Apply regex patterns to detect explicit component references (e.g., “dimension 63”, “filter 5 in conv1”). 2. Query type classification : Classify query as conceptual, correlation-focused, family-related, or component-specific based on keywords and extracted entities. 3. Dynamic budget allocation (VAE only): Allocate retrieval slots across indices based on query type. For specific dimension queries with k = 20 total slots: • Dimension Index: kdim = 12 (60%) • Q&A Index: kqa = 4 (20%) • Interaction Index: kint = 2 (10%) • Narrative Index: knarr = 2 (10%) 4. Exact match retrieval : For queries with explicit entity references, retrieve all documents for the referenced components and apply similarity boost ( ×1.5). 5. Semantic search : Fill remaining slots via cosine similarity search across relevant indices. 6. Re-ranking : Sort final results by (exact match, boosted similarity) in descending order. 

Why multi-index architecture (VAE). Separating indices by content type enables targeted retrieval for different query intents: • “What does dimension 63 encode?” → Prioritizes Dimension Index for unit-specific data. • “How do VAE latent spaces work?” → Prioritizes Q&A Index for conceptual answers. • “What dimensions interact with 63?” → Prioritizes Interaction Index for relationship evidence. • “What is the Wearing Lipstick family?” → Prioritizes Narrative Index for family summaries. The ablation study (Table 41) confirms that removing any single index degrades performance, with the Dimension Index being most critical (removing it causes recall to drop to 0% on dimension-specific queries). 

Why multi-field indexing. Each Manifestation Unit generates multiple documents (one per field), enabling queries to retrieve the most relevant view of a unit. For example, “What does dimension 63 encode?” retrieves the summary document, while “Which dimensions are redundant with dimension 63?” retrieves the redundancy notes document. This yields higher precision than concatenating all fields into a single document (see ablation: Unstructured Text baseline achieves only 20.0% recall vs. 94.3% for structured retrieval). 24 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability 

C.6. Example Queries and Retrieval Retrieval traces. To illustrate retrieval behavior, we present traces from 50 example queries per system, focusing on the 

Relationship Discovery category. This illustrative set is separate from the main evaluation benchmark (Appx. F.3). The 50 example queries are distributed across three query types that test different retrieval capabilities. 

Query distribution. 

• Pairwise correlation (25 queries): Single or paired component queries. Ground truth field: 

pairwise interaction .• Triple correlation (20 queries): Three-component relationship queries. Ground truth field: multi interaction .• Family members (5 queries): Semantic grouping queries. Ground truth field: summary .Table 8 shows representative queries and their retrieval behavior.    

> Table 8. Example queries and retrieval traces. Exact matches (EM) receive 1.5×similarity boost.

Query Type Retrieved Fields Retrieval Behavior 

VAE System (512 dimensions, 4 indices, 5,457 total documents) 

“What does dimension 63 en-code?” pairwise Dim 63: summary, generation role, redun-dancy notes, manipula-tion guide (all EM) Exact match on dim id=63; all 4 fields retrieved with 1.5× boost “Why are dimensions 49, 4, and 215 correlated?” triple Dims 49, 4, 215: sum-mary (EM) + Interaction docs for pairs Exact match on 3 dims + seman-tic search in Interaction Index “Why are dimensions 154, 186, and 308 correlated?” family Dims 154, 186, 308: summary (EM) + Narra-tive family insights Family detected; Narrative Index allocation increased 

CNN System (224 filters, 1 index, 943 documents) 

“What does filter 0 in conv1 en-code?” pairwise conv1-f0: summary, tech-nical, class responses, re-lationships, manipulation (all EM) Exact match on (conv1, 0); all 5 fields retrieved “Why are filters 0, 16, and 17 in conv1 correlated?” triple conv1-f0, f16, f17: sum-mary, relationships (EM) Exact match on 3 filters + seman-tic expansion “Why are filters 0, 1, and 2 in conv1 correlated?” family conv1-f0, f1, f2: sum-mary (EM) Summary fields contain fam-ily/grouping information 

Retrieval workflow trace (VAE). For the query “What does dimension 63 encode?”: 1. Entity extraction : Regex detects “dimension 63” → target dims = [63] 

2. Query classification : Single dimension query → type = specific 

3. Budget allocation : k = 20 allocated as: dim=12, qa=4, int=2, narr=2 4. Exact match : All 4 documents for dimension 63 retrieved with 1.5× boost 25 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability 

5. Semantic fill : Remaining 8 dim slots filled with similar dimension summaries (dims 67, 351, 332, ...); Q&A slots filled with related questions (“What does dimension 64 encode?”) 6. Final retrieval : 20 documents total, 4 exact matches, avg similarity 60.15% 7. Context assembly : Documents grouped by dimension ID for coherent LLM input 

Retrieval workflow trace (CNN). For the query “What does filter 0 in conv1 detect?”: 1. Entity extraction : Regex detects “filter 0 in conv1” → target = [(conv1, 0)] 

2. Field detection : Query contains “what does” → primary field = summary 

3. Exact match : All 5 documents for conv1-filter0 retrieved with 1.5× boost 4. Semantic fill : Remaining slots filled with related filters (conv1-f1, conv1-f16, conv2-f0, ...) 5. Final retrieval : 10 documents total, 1 exact match in required field, avg similarity 58.86% 

C.7. Generation Prompt 

The language model (Qwen3-8B) receives the query along with retrieved evidence grouped by entity. The prompt enforces grounded answering: the model must answer based only on retrieved content and must cite numeric values from retrieved fields. 

System prompt structure. The system prompt specifies: • Model context : Architecture description (VAE with 512 dimensions / CNN with 224 filters across 3 layers) • Grounding rules : Cite specific data from retrieved documents; distinguish facts from interpretation • Domain knowledge : Architecture-specific concepts (semantic families, layer hierarchy, correlation semantics) • Response format : Quote exact numeric values; explain relationships using retrieved evidence 

VAE context format. Retrieved documents are provided grouped by dimension: 

=== RETRIEVED EVIDENCE === Dimension 63 • summary: Dimension 63 primarily encodes ’Wearing_Lipstick’ with correlation 0.303. Family: Wearing_Lipstick. Variance: 0.0174. Strong correlations: 368. • generation_role: During face generation, this dimension primarily controls ’Wearing_Lipstick’. Hub dimension with extensive connections to other dimensions. • redundancy_notes: This dimension has 156 very high correlations (>0.9). Redundant with dims 320, 241, 310. • manipulation_guide: To manipulate ’Wearing_Lipstick’: adjust dimension 63. Co-manipulate correlated dims. Q&A Knowledge • Q: What does dimension 64 encode? [similarity: 72.2%] • Q: What does dimension 96 encode? [similarity: 70.5%] Narrative Insights • Family Wearing_Lipstick: 35 dimensions encoding makeup... === END EVIDENCE === 

26 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability 

CNN context format. For CNN queries, evidence is grouped by layer and filter: 

=== RETRIEVED EVIDENCE === CONV1 Filter 0• summary: Filter 0 in conv1 is a general-purpose low-level feature detector. Selectivity: 0.16. Mean activation: 0.128. • technical_properties: Sparsity: 0.0009 (dense activation). Std: 0.048. Range: [0.0, 0.31]. • class_responses: Top classes - automobile ($\mu$=0.154), frog ($\mu$=0.142), truck ($\mu$=0.138). • relationships: 4 synergistic partners. Strongest: filter 16 (r=0.75), filter 17 (r=0.74), filter 3 (r=0.71). • manipulation_guide: Enhance automobile/frog detection by amplifying filter 0. Co-amplify filters 16, 17. CONV1 Filter 16 [semantic match, similarity: 65.2%] • summary: Filter 16 in conv1 specializes in edge detection... === END EVIDENCE === 

The model is instructed to quote numeric values verbatim from these fields (e.g., “correlation 0.303”, “selectivity 0.16”), ensuring traceability from response to extracted statistics. 

## D. SLM Configuration and Ablation Study 

This appendix documents the Small Language Model (SLM) configuration used in the conversational interface and presents comprehensive ablation studies evaluating the impact of generation parameters on response quality. 

D.1. Conversational Architecture 

Figure 14 and 15 illustrate the RAG conversational architectures for the VAE and CNN systems, respectively. 

D.2. SLM Configuration Parameters 

Both conversational systems use Qwen3-8B as the generation backbone with configurable parameters for ablation studies. Table 9 summarizes the parameter space explored.  

> Table 9. SLM configuration parameters and their ablation ranges.

Parameter Default Ablation Range Description 

model name qwen3:8b Base language model 

temperature 0.7 [0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9, 1.0] Sampling temperature 

max tokens 2000 [500, 1000, 2000, 4000] Maximum output tokens 

num predict 3000 Ollama prediction budget 

prompt method detailed [minimal, structured, cot, detailed] Prompt engineering strategy 

top p 0.9 Nucleus sampling threshold 

top k 20–40 Top-k sampling cutoff 

Ablation study experimental design. Table 10 summarizes the experimental configurations for each ablation study. Each study varies one parameter while holding others constant, enabling isolated analysis of parameter effects. 

Parameter definitions. 

27 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability 

Figure 14. VAE RAG Conversational Architecture and SLM Ablation Study Design. Top : The system processes user queries (e.g., “What does dimension 63 encode?”) through: (1) Query Reformulation with structure-based state tracking, (2) Entity Extraction detecting query types (dimensions, families, correlations), (3) Hybrid Retrieval combining Exact Match (family-aware), Semantic Search (context-enhanced embedding), Dynamic Allocation (query-adaptive k with 4-tier budget), and Family Retrieval (pre-computed mapping), (4) Multi-FAISS Index Search across 4 databases (Dimensions, Interactions, Q&A, Narratives), and (5) Conversation State Management tracking current dimensions, families, focus entities, and discussed correlations. The SLM (Qwen3-8B) generates grounded responses citing specific statistics from retrieved Manifestation Units. Bottom : Ablation study design showing parameter configurations for Temperature Study (varying 0.1–1.0), Prompt Study (minimal, structured, cot, detailed), and Max Tokens Study (500–4000). 

Table 10. Ablation study experimental design. Each study varies one parameter (bold) while holding others at default values. 

Evaluation Study Max Tokens Prompt Method Temperature 

Temperature Study 3000 detailed 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9, 1.0 

Prompt Study 3000 minimal, structured, cot, detailed 0.7 Max Tokens Study 500, 1000, 2000, 4000 detailed 0.7 • temperature : Controls randomness in token sampling. Lower values (0.1–0.3) produce more deterministic, focused outputs; higher values (0.7–1.0) increase diversity and creativity. • max tokens : Maximum number of tokens the model can generate per response. Affects response comprehensiveness and detail level. • prompt method : Strategy for constructing the generation prompt from retrieved context: 

– minimal : Raw context concatenation with simple question-answer format 

– structured : Organized sections with clear field delineation 

– cot (Chain-of-Thought): Step-by-step reasoning instructions 

– detailed : Comprehensive system instructions with grounding rules, domain knowledge, and structured output format (default) 

D.3. Prompt Engineering Methods 

We evaluate four prompt engineering strategies, each representing a different level of instruction specificity. 28 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability 

Figure 15. CNN RAG Manifestation Architecture and SLM Ablation Study Design. Top : The architecture processes filter queries (e.g., “What does filter 10 in conv2 detect?”) through: (1) Query Reformulation with conversation tracking (pronoun resolution), (2) Entity Extraction identifying filter IDs and layers, (3) Hybrid Retrieval with Exact Match (filter + layer lookup), Semantic Search (FAISS vector), and Dynamic Allocation (query-adaptive k), (4) Single unified FAISS index (Conv-Filter: 3 layers, 5 MU fields), and (5) Filtering & Ranking with similarity threshold (0.3), exact match boosting ( 1.5×), and over-retrieval ( 5× candidates). The SLM generates responses grounded in retrieved context with appropriate source citations. Bottom : Identical ablation study design to VAE, enabling cross-architecture comparison. 

Minimal prompt. Direct context injection with no system instructions: 

Context: {retrieved_documents} Question: {query} Answer: 

Structured prompt. Organized sections separating context by source type: 

You are a {VAE/CNN} analysis assistant. [DIMENSION/FILTER DATA] {dimension/filter context grouped by entity} [REFERENCE Q&A] {qa context} [QUESTION] {query} [ANSWER] 

29 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability 

Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompt. Explicit reasoning steps before final answer: 

You are analyzing a {VAE/CNN} trained on {CelebA/CIFAR-10}. Available information: {bulleted context items} Question: {query} Think step by step: 1. What specific information from the context is relevant? 2. What does this information tell us? 3. What can we conclude? Final Answer: 

Detailed prompt. Comprehensive instructions including grounding rules, domain knowledge, and output format specifica-tions. This method includes: • System role definition with architecture-specific expertise • Explicit grounding rules (“cite specific data”, “distinguish facts from interpretation”) • Domain terminology (semantic families, layer hierarchy, correlation semantics) • Structured output format with metric tags for automatic verification • Example question-answer pairs demonstrating expected response style See Appx. C.7 for the complete detailed prompt template. 

D.4. Ablation Study: Maximum Token Length 

We evaluate the impact of maximum token limits on generation quality while holding retrieval parameters constant ( k = 20 ). All experiments use 50 queries per system. Table 11 presents the VAE system results across token settings.   

> Table 11. VAE system: Maximum token ablation results. Retrieval metrics remain constant across all token settings. Best results per metric are bolded .

## Retrieval ( k=20) Generation Quality Faithfulness & Factual Max Tokens Recall Prec NDCG F1 ↑ RG-L ↑ BERT ↑ Attr ↑ Sem ↑ Fact ↑

## 500 1.000 0.468 0.963 0.259 0.166 0.810 0.618 0.448 0.902 1000 1.000 0.468 0.963 0.394 0.230 0.837 0.612 0.356 0.984 

## 2000 1.000 0.468 0.963 0.383 0.219 0.836 0.597 0.339 0.980 4000 1.000 0.468 0.963 0.393 0.225 0.837 0.571 0.321 0.985 

Table 12 shows the stability analysis across token settings. 

Key findings. 

• Retrieval stability : All retrieval metrics show zero variance across token settings, confirming that generation parameters do not affect retrieval quality. 30 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability  

> Table 12. VAE system: Stability analysis across maximum token settings. Retrieval metrics show zero variance (perfect stability), while generation metrics exhibit controlled variability.

Category Metric Mean Std Dev Min Max 

Retrieval Recall@20 1.000 0.000 1.000 1.000 Precision@20 0.468 0.000 0.468 0.468 NDCG@20 0.963 0.000 0.963 0.963 Generation F1 Score 0.357 0.061 0.259 0.394 ROUGE-L 0.210 0.029 0.166 0.230 BERTScore 0.830 0.012 0.810 0.837 Faithfulness Attribution 0.600 0.020 0.571 0.618 Semantic Overlap 0.366 0.054 0.321 0.448 Factual Accuracy 0.963 0.039 0.902 0.985 • Optimal balance : Token limit of 1000 achieves the best trade-off between generation quality (highest F1, ROUGE-L) and faithfulness (highest factual accuracy at 98.4%). • Diminishing returns : Increasing beyond 1000 tokens improves BERTScore marginally (0.837) but decreases Attri-bution (0.571 at 4000 vs. 0.618 at 500), suggesting longer responses include more content not directly grounded in retrieved evidence. 

D.5. Ablation Study: Prompt Engineering Methods 

We evaluate four prompt engineering strategies while holding other parameters constant (temperature=0.7, max tokens=3000, 

k = 20 ). Table 13 compares prompt methods across key metrics for both systems.   

> Table 13. Prompt engineering comparison across VAE and CNN systems. Best values per metric are bolded .

VAE System CNN System Method F1 ↑ RG-L ↑ BERT ↑ Attr ↑ Sem ↑ Fact ↑ F1 ↑ RG-L ↑ BERT ↑ Attr ↑ Sem ↑ Fact ↑

Minimal 0.330 0.198 0.841 0.619 0.389 0.988 0.162 0.120 0.838 1.000 0.653 1.000 

Structured 0.359 0.200 0.842 0.596 0.347 0.988 0.176 0.127 0.838 0.997 0.656 0.935 CoT 0.359 0.224 0.834 0.587 0.380 0.991 0.264 0.169 0.832 0.516 0.404 0.959 Detailed 0.390 0.224 0.842 0.609 0.368 0.985 0.396 0.219 0.850 0.682 0.363 0.939 

Table 14 shows the stability analysis across prompt methods. 

Key findings. 

• Generation quality : Detailed prompting consistently achieves highest F1 and ROUGE-L scores across both systems, with particularly strong gains on CNN (+0.234 F1 vs. Minimal). • Faithfulness trade-off : Minimal prompting achieves perfect Attribution on CNN (1.000) but lower generation quality. This suggests minimal prompts produce responses that closely mirror retrieved content but lack interpretive depth. • Factual accuracy : CoT achieves highest factual accuracy on VAE (0.991), while Minimal achieves perfect accuracy on CNN (1.000). Both demonstrate that explicit grounding instructions improve factual reliability. • System differences : CNN shows higher variance across prompt methods than VAE, indicating the simpler architecture is more sensitive to prompt engineering choices. 31 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability  

> Table 14. Stability analysis across prompt engineering methods. Retrieval metrics show zero variance, while generation metrics exhibit controlled variability.

Category Metric Mean Std Dev Min Max 

Retrieval Recall@20 1.000 0.000 1.000 1.000 Precision@20 0.468 0.000 0.468 0.468 NDCG@20 0.963 0.000 0.963 0.963 Generation F1 Score 0.360 0.024 0.330 0.390 ROUGE-L 0.211 0.014 0.198 0.224 BERTScore 0.838 0.004 0.834 0.842 Faithfulness Attribution 0.603 0.014 0.587 0.619 Semantic Overlap 0.371 0.018 0.347 0.389 Factual Accuracy 0.988 0.002 0.985 0.991 

D.6. Ablation Study: Temperature 

We evaluate six temperature settings from deterministic (0.1) to high creativity (1.0) while holding other parameters constant (prompt method=detailed, max tokens=3000, k = 20 ). Table 15 presents the VAE temperature ablation results.   

> Table 15. VAE system: Temperature ablation results. Best results per metric are bolded .

# Retrieval ( k=20) Generation Quality Faithfulness & Factual Temp. Recall Prec NDCG F1 ↑ RG-L ↑ BERT ↑ Attr ↑ Sem ↑ Fact ↑

# 0.1 1.000 0.468 0.963 0.386 0.219 0.835 0.580 0.351 0.975 0.3 1.000 0.468 0.963 0.391 0.223 0.837 0.587 0.309 0.985 

# 0.5 1.000 0.468 0.963 0.395 0.231 0.838 0.617 0.379 0.978 0.7 1.000 0.468 0.963 0.381 0.221 0.834 0.626 0.372 0.972 0.9 1.000 0.468 0.963 0.391 0.220 0.836 0.606 0.337 0.981 1.0 1.000 0.468 0.963 0.387 0.223 0.837 0.574 0.321 0.981 

Table 16 presents the CNN temperature ablation results. Table 17 shows stability analysis with coefficient of variation. 

Key findings. 

• High stability : All generation metrics exhibit coefficient of variation (CV) below 5% across the temperature range, indicating the SLM produces consistent quality outputs regardless of sampling temperature. • System-specific optima : VAE prefers moderate temperatures (0.5–0.7) while CNN prefers higher temperatures (0.9–1.0) for generation quality. This difference may reflect the complexity of the underlying analysis: VAE’s richer semantic structure benefits from more focused generation, while CNN’s simpler filter descriptions benefit from more diverse phrasing. • Factual accuracy : Both systems achieve highest factual accuracy at lower temperatures (0.3), suggesting deterministic generation reduces hallucination risk. • Default recommendation : Temperature 0.7 provides a robust default balancing generation quality, faithfulness, and response diversity for both systems. 32 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability   

> Table 16. CNN system: Temperature ablation results. Best results per metric are bolded .

# Retrieval ( k=20) Generation Quality Faithfulness & Factual Temp. Recall Prec NDCG F1 ↑ RG-L ↑ BERT ↑ Attr ↑ Sem ↑ Fact ↑

# 0.1 1.000 0.468 0.963 0.388 0.224 0.851 0.655 0.376 0.918 0.3 1.000 0.468 0.963 0.382 0.214 0.851 0.662 0.359 0.956 

# 0.5 1.000 0.468 0.963 0.382 0.220 0.849 0.629 0.337 0.927 0.7 1.000 0.468 0.963 0.386 0.221 0.849 0.691 0.375 0.939 0.9 1.000 0.468 0.963 0.401 0.226 0.854 0.648 0.358 0.945 1.0 1.000 0.468 0.963 0.388 0.217 0.850 0.704 0.372 0.927  

> Table 17. Temperature stability analysis. All generation metrics exhibit CV below 5%, indicating high stability across temperature range.

Category Metric Mean Std Dev CV (%) 

Retrieval Recall@20 1.000 0.000 0.0 Precision@20 0.468 0.000 0.0 NDCG@20 0.963 0.000 0.0 Generation F1 Score 0.389 0.005 1.3 ROUGE-L 0.223 0.004 1.8 BERTScore 0.836 0.002 0.2 Faithfulness Attribution 0.598 0.019 3.2 Semantic Overlap 0.345 0.026 7.5 Factual Accuracy 0.979 0.004 0.4 

D.7. Implementation Details Conversation state management. Both systems maintain structured conversation state for context-aware query handling: 

# VAE conversation state conversation_state = {"current_dimensions": set(), # e.g., {63, 501} "current_families": set(), # e.g., {"Male"} "last_focus_entity": str, # e.g., "dimension_63" "discussed_correlations": list # e.g., [(63, 501)] }# CNN conversation state conversation_state = {"current_filters": set(), # e.g., {("conv2", 10)} "current_layers": set(), # e.g., {"conv2"} "current_classes": set(), # e.g., {"automobile"} "last_focus_entity": str, # e.g., "filter_conv2_10" "discussed_relationships": list # e.g., [(("conv1", 5), ("conv1", 16))] }

Query reformulation. The system resolves pronouns and implicit references using conversation state: • “its correlation” → “dimension 63’s correlation” (VAE) • “in the same family” → “in the Male family” (VAE) 33 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability 

• “filter 10’s partners” → “filter 10 in conv2’s partners” (CNN) • “other filters in this layer” → “other filters in conv2 besides filter 10” (CNN) 

Response generation. The SLM is invoked via Ollama’s local API: 

response = requests.post( "http://localhost:11434/api/generate", json={ "model": "qwen3:8b", "prompt": grounded_prompt, "stream": False, "options": {"temperature": 0.7, "num_predict": 3000, "max_tokens": 2000, "top_p": 0.9, "top_k": 20 }})

Thinking tag removal. Qwen3’s reasoning traces (enclosed in <think>...</think> tags) are stripped from re-sponses unless explicitly requested, ensuring clean output for evaluation and user interaction. 

D.8. Architectural Differences Summary 

Table 18 summarizes the key architectural differences between the VAE and CNN conversational systems. 

## E. Manipulation Details 

E.1. VAE Manipulation 

Given a target concept ctarget (e.g., “Smiling”): 1. Retrieve dimensions where |sd,c target | > τ s (default τs = 0 .3). 2. Select top-n dimensions by |sd,c target | (default n = 3 ). 3. For each selected dimension d, modify: 

z′ 

> d

= zd + sign (sd,c target ) · step · σd (12) where σd is the standard deviation of dimension d across the training set, and step is from G (default 2.0). 4. Decode: x′ = pθ (z′).

E.2. CNN Manipulation 

Given a target class ctarget (e.g., “dog”): 1. Retrieve filters where selectivity for ctarget exceeds threshold. 2. Select top-n filters by selectivity (default n = 3 ). 3. For each selected filter f , we apply amplification to the post-ReLU feature map: 

a′ 

> f

= α · af (13) 34 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability  

> Table 18. Architectural comparison between VAE and CNN conversational systems.

Component VAE System CNN System 

Model Scope 

Components 512 latent dimensions 224 filters (32+64+128) Attributes 40 CelebA facial attributes 10 CIFAR-10 classes Semantic groupings 20 families 3 layers (conv1, conv2, conv3) 

Index Architecture 

Number of indices 4 (Dimension, Q&A, Interaction, Narrative) 1 (unified) Total documents 5,457 943 Fields per unit 4 5

Retrieval Strategy 

Dynamic allocation Yes (4-tier query-adaptive k) Yes (query-adaptive k)Family-aware retrieval Yes (pre-computed mapping) No Exact match boosting 1.5× 1.5×

Similarity threshold 0.3 0.3 

Conversation State 

Entity tracking dimensions, families, correlations filters, layers, classes Relationship tracking correlation pairs synergistic partnerships 

Default SLM Configuration 

Temperature 0.7 0.7 Max tokens 2000 2000 Prompt method detailed detailed 

where α0 is a conservative starting gain stored in G for interactive use (default 1.5). For evaluation, we override this and sweep α ∈ { 10 , 30 , 50 , 70 , 90 , 100 } (see Sec. 5). 4. Forward pass with modified activations and measure probability shift. 

E.3. Manipulation Validation 

To validate that excavated knowledge is both actionable (enables successful manipulations) and faithful (retrieved compo-nents are semantically correct), we conducted comprehensive evaluation across both architectures. E.3.1. CNN A UTOMATIC EVALUATION 

We systematically tested all 90 source →target class pairs (10 classes × 9 targets) across 6 amplification levels ( α ∈{10 , 30 , 50 , 70 , 90 , 100 }), yielding 540 total manipulation attempts. 

Success Rate by Amplification. Figure 16 shows success rates by amplification level. Performance increases sharply from 44% at α = 10 to approximately 80% at α ≥ 70 , with optimal performance in the 70–100 × range. The overall success rate across all amplification levels is 72%. 

Baseline Comparison: RAG-Guided vs Random Selection. To validate that success stems from meaningful filter-class mappings rather than noise exploitation, we compared RAG-guided filter selection against a random baseline. Both methods used identical conditions: same amplification factors ( α ∈ { 30 , 50 , 70 }), same number of filters, and same source images. The only difference was the filter selection criterion (Figure 17). Table 20 shows the breakdown by amplification factor for this single-seed visualisation run. The near-zero random success 35 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability 10 30 50 70 90 100 

# Amplification Factor 

# 40 

# 50 

# 60 

# 70 

# 80 

# 90 

> Success Rate (%)

Figure 16. CNN manipulation success rate by amplification factor. Performance plateaus around 80% for α ≥ 70 .

Table 19. Baseline comparison validates that excavated knowledge is meaningful. This visualisation run used a single random seed and obtained 0% success (0/270). The three-seed mean reported in Table 2 is 6.7% (18/270); single seeds vary between 0 and ∼10%, confirming the large gap to RAG-guided selection (76.3%) is robust to seed choice. Method Success Rate Tests Description RAG-Guided 76.3% 270 Filters from MANIFESTATION analysis Random Baseline 0.0% 270 Random filters, single seed (3-seed mean: 6.7%) 

(0% here; 6.7% three-seed mean in Table 2) provides strong evidence that MANIFESTATION’s excavated filter-class mappings capture genuine semantic structure rather than reflecting noise exploitation. E.3.2. C LASS -P AIR ANALYSIS 

Figure 18 shows the manipulation success rate for each source →target class pair, revealing systematic patterns in manipula-tion difficulty. 

Category-Level Analysis. We grouped CIFAR-10 classes into vehicles (airplane, automobile, ship, truck) and animals (bird, cat, deer, dog, frog, horse) to analyze cross-category manipulation patterns (Figure 19). Table 21 summarizes the results. The asymmetry between V →A (78%) and A →V (36%) suggests that vehicle features are more easily suppressed than animal features, possibly because the CNN encodes animal classes with more distributed, redundant filter responses. 

Asymmetric Manipulability. Figure 20 reveals that classes differ significantly in both source manipulability (how easily they can be transformed away from) and target vulnerability (how easily other images can be transformed into them). Key observations: • Most manipulable sources : automobile, cat, truck, horse • Least manipulable sources : deer, bird, frog • Most vulnerable targets : deer, airplane, bird • Least vulnerable targets : truck, automobile 36 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability RAG-Guided Random 

> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Success Rate (%)
> 76.3%
> (206/270)
> 0.0%
> (0/270)
> +76.3%

Baseline Comparison: Analysis Validation 

(270 tests, identical conditions)                 

> Figure 17. RAG-guided vs. random baseline (single seed, n=270 ). Random filter selection achieves 0% success; RAG-guided achieves 76.3%. The three-seed mean for random (Table 2) is 6.7%, confirming the ≈70 pp gap is robust. Correct filter selection—not arbitrary amplification—is what drives the difference.
> Table 20. Detailed baseline comparison by amplification factor. Amplification RAG-Guided Random ∆
> 30 ×73.3% 0.0% +73.3% 50 ×75.6% 0.0% +75.6% 70 ×80.0% 0.0% +80.0%

E.3.3. CNN H UMAN EVALUATION 

To validate that automatic metrics align with human perception, evaluators assessed manipulation quality on a subset of tasks (14 evaluations). 

Metrics. Evaluators rated each manipulation on: • Classification Success : Did the manipulation achieve the requested class change? (Yes/Partially/No) • Filter Explanation Quality : Were the selected filters meaningfully explained? (Yes/Partially/No) • Manipulation Coherence : Did the manipulation make logical sense? (1–5 scale) • Task Difficulty : Perceived difficulty of the transformation (Easy/Medium/Hard/Very Hard) • Iterations Needed : Number of attempts required (1/2/3–4/5+) 

Results. Table 22 summarizes the CNN human evaluation results. 

Human-Automatic Alignment. Table 23 shows that human coherence ratings correlate with automatic classification success, validating that automatic metrics serve as reliable proxies for manipulation quality. The 2-point gap in coherence ratings between successful and failed manipulations validates that automatic classification success serves as a reliable proxy for human-perceived manipulation quality. Furthermore, 93% of evaluators rated filter 37 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability plane 

> auto
> bird
> cat
> deer
> dog
> frog
> horse
> ship
> truck

# Target Class 

# plane 

# auto 

# bird 

# cat 

# deer 

# dog 

# frog 

# horse 

# ship 

# truck 

> Source Class

0 74 66 80 49 58 51 58 37 

100 100 100 100 61 100 100 59 43 

34 0 32 32 0 29 0 0 0

100 53 100 100 60 100 100 70 47 

31 0 0 28 19 0 0 31 0

71 37 63 59 68 68 58 56 0

42 31 30 29 36 0 0 0 25 

100 42 100 100 100 51 100 60 33 

63 47 68 65 81 46 60 50 0

100 46 100 100 100 66 100 100 59 

# 0

# 20 

# 40 

# 60 

# 80 

# 100 

> Success Rate (%)

Figure 18. Manipulation success rate by class pair. Values indicate success rate (%) across amplification levels. Notable patterns include high success for horse and truck as sources, and difficulty with automobile as target. 

explanations as at least partially satisfactory, indicating that the SLM+RAG system provides meaningful justifications for its filter selections. E.3.4. VAE H UMAN EVALUATION 

Unlike CNN where classification shift provides an objective success criterion, VAE manipulation quality requires human assessment of visual outputs. We conducted human evaluation with 17 manipulation attempts across diverse instructions (“smile face”, “make her old”, “add glasses”, “give beard”, etc.). 

Metrics. Evaluators assessed each manipulation on: • Visual Faithfulness : Does the modification match the requested change? (1–5) • Degree of Change : How visible is the modification? (1–5) • Identity Preserved : Is it recognizably the same person? (Yes/Partial/No) • Artifact Quality : Visual distortions present? (None/Mild/Moderate/Severe) • Interaction Quality : How smooth was the interaction? (1–5) • Instruction Clarity : How clear was the instruction interpretation? (1–5) 

Results. Table 24 summarizes VAE manipulation evaluation results. 38 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability V V V A A V A A

0

20 

40 

60 

80 

100 

> Mean Success Rate (%)

51% 

78% 

36% 

49%                     

> Figure 19. Success rate by transformation category. V →A (vehicle to animal) achieves highest success (78%), while A →V (animal to vehicle) is most challenging (36%).
> Table 21. Manipulation success rate by category transformation. Transformation Success Rate Interpretation V→A (Vehicle to Animal) 78% Easiest V→V (Vehicle to Vehicle) 51% Moderate A→A (Animal to Animal) 49% Moderate A→V (Animal to Vehicle) 36% Hardest

Key Findings. 

• High identity preservation (94% Yes): Manipulations are targeted to specific attributes without distorting the overall face structure. • Low artifact rate : 76% of manipulations had no or only mild artifacts. • Moderate visual faithfulness (2.12/5): This reflects VAE reconstruction limitations rather than retrieval errors the system correctly identifies relevant dimensions but the decoder struggles to render subtle attribute changes. • Good interaction quality (3.47/5): Users found the conversational interface responsive and logical. 

Retrieval Consistency. A key validation finding: the same semantic instruction consistently retrieves the same dimensions across different evaluators. For example, all “smiling” requests (“smile face”, “add smile”, “enhance smiling”) retrieved dimensions 483, 9, 489, 357, and 446 the “Smiling” semantic family identified during excavation. This consistency demonstrates that the SLM+RAG system reliably grounds natural language instructions in the correct latent dimensions. 

Why Automatic Evaluation is Difficult for VAE. Unlike CNN manipulation where classification provides an objective metric, VAE manipulation lacks ground-truth success criteria: 39 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability 0 20 40 60 80 100 

Success Rate (%) 

> auto
> cat
> truck
> horse
> plane
> ship
> dog
> frog
> bird
> deer

(a) Source Manipulability      

> 020 40 60 80 100

Success Rate (%) 

> deer
> plane
> bird
> frog
> cat
> horse
> dog
> ship
> auto
> truck

(b) Target Vulnerability  

> Vehicle Animal

Figure 20. (a) Source manipulability: automobile and cat are easiest to transform. (b) Target vulnerability: deer and airplane are easiest targets. 

Table 22. CNN human manipulation evaluation results (14 evaluations). Metric Result Classification Success Yes: 79%, No: 21% Filter Explanation Quality Yes: 64%, Partially: 29%, No: 7% Manipulation Coherence 3.64 ± 1.28 / 5.0 Task Difficulty Easy: 36%, Medium: 50%, Hard: 14% Iterations Needed 1: 57%, 2: 21%, 3–4: 14%, 5+: 7% 

• “More smiling” is inherently subjective • VAE reconstruction introduces artifacts unrelated to manipulation • Attribute entanglement means dimensions affect multiple attributes For these reasons, we rely on human evaluation for VAE validation and acknowledge that baseline comparison (random dimension selection) would require prohibitively large human studies. 

E.4. Optimization Strategies for Resistant Pairs 

For the 25 class pairs that failed at all initial amplification levels, we applied a systematic optimization protocol. Critically, the filter set retrieved by the SLM+RAG system was held constant; only intervention parameters were varied. Figure 21 shows the improvement from optimization, with 23 of 25 resistant pairs resolved. 

Strategies Tested. 

1. Higher amplifications : α ∈ { 150 , 200 , 300 , 500 } with single iteration 2. Multiple iterations : 2–5 sequential amplification applications at α ∈ { 30 , 50 , 70 , 100 }

3. Different source images : 3 distinct test images per source class 4. Query variations : 6 alternative phrasings (e.g., “transform into”, “convert to”) 5. Two-step transformations : Source →intermediate →target via high-vulnerability classes 6. Extreme settings : α = 1000 single iteration, α = 200 with 5 iterations 

Results. Of 25 resistant pairs, 23 were resolved through parameter optimization alone (Table 25). The most effective strategies were higher amplification (resolved 15 pairs) and different source images (resolved 5 pairs). Two pairs remained resistant: airplane →automobile and ship →truck. 40 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability                            

> Table 23. Human-automatic alignment for CNN manipulation. Human coherence ratings correlate strongly with automatic classification success. Classification Success (Auto) Coherence (Human) n
> Yes 4.00 ±1.18 11 No 2.00 ±1.00 3
> Table 24. VAE human manipulation evaluation results (17 evaluations). Visual faithfulness is moderate, limited by VAE reconstruction quality rather than retrieval accuracy. Identity preservation is high, indicating targeted manipulation without global distortion. Metric Result Visual Faithfulness 2.12 ±0.76 / 5.0 Degree of Change 2.35 ±0.86 / 5.0 Identity Preserved Yes: 94%, Partial: 6% Artifact Quality None: 41%, Mild: 35%, Moderate: 18%, Severe: 6% Interaction Quality 3.47 ±1.07 / 5.0 Instruction Clarity 3.82 ±0.95 / 5.0

Analysis of Persistent Failures. The two unresolved pairs (airplane →automobile, ship →truck) are both vehicle →vehicle transitions. Analysis of the retrieved filters shows high overlap: filters selective for “airplane” also respond strongly to “automobile” (both encode metallic surfaces, geometric shapes). This represents a genuine limitation of the CNN’s learned representations the model encodes vehicles in a shared feature subspace rather than a failure of the retrieval system. 

E.5. Filter Selectivity and Class Overlap 

During manipulation experiments, we observed that some filters respond to multiple classes with different selectivity strengths. For example, Filter 81 in Conv3 responds to both dog (primary, s = 0 .92 ) and cat (secondary, s = 0 .31 ). 

The Shared Filter Problem. Na ¨ıvely retrieving “filters associated with cat” would include Filter 81, since cat appears in its top-k class responses. However, amplifying Filter 81 strengthens dog classification more than cat , potentially producing the opposite of the intended effect. We observed this failure mode early in development: requesting “make this a cat” on a dog image sometimes increased dog probability. 

Solution: Primary-Class Retrieval Rule. Our system addresses this by selecting only filters where the target class is the 

primary response (highest selectivity), not merely present in the top-k responses. Formally, for target class c, we retrieve: 

Fc = {f : arg max  

> c′

sf,c ′ = c} (14) where sf,c ′ is the selectivity of filter f for class c′. This rule is the typed retrieval primitive isolated in the H2 decomposition (Sec. 5.2, Table 2, condition C3 vs A): selectivity-only ranking achieves 58.9% success; adding the primary-class rule on top of the same selectivity raises success to 76.3% ( +17 .4pp). The rule is only expressible because S is a typed ranking with a well-defined “primary class”—an unstructured feature store does not admit it. 

Implication for Framework Design. This finding validates the importance of the Semantics field S in Manifestation Units: storing ranked associations rather than binary presence enables disambiguation of shared components. The (E, S, R, D, G )

structure explicitly supports this through ordered concept lists with quantified strengths. 

E.6. Validation Metrics VAE: Human evaluation of visual faithfulness, identity preservation, and artifact quality. The consistent retrieval of semantically correct dimensions validates analysis faithfulness even when visual quality is limited by VAE reconstruction. 

CNN: We measure the probability shift toward the target class: 

∆p = p(ctarget |x, a ′) − p(ctarget |x, a ) (15) 41 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability plane 

> auto
> bird
> cat
> deer
> dog
> frog
> horse
> ship
> truck

Target 

> plane
> auto
> bird
> cat
> deer
> dog
> frog
> horse
> ship
> truck
> Source

## (a) Before Optimization 

> plane
> auto
> bird
> cat
> deer
> dog
> frog
> horse
> ship
> truck

Target 

> plane
> auto
> bird
> cat
> deer
> dog
> frog
> horse
> ship
> truck
> Source

## (b) After Optimization      

> 020 40 60 80 100

Success Rate (%) 

Figure 21. Manipulation success before and after optimization. Green-bordered cells in (b) indicate pairs resolved through parameter optimization. Only airplane →automobile and ship →truck remain resistant. 

Table 25. Optimization strategy effectiveness for resistant pairs. Strategy Pairs Resolved Success Rate Higher amplification ( α > 100 ) 15 60% Different source images 5 20% Multiple iterations 2 8% Two-step transformation 1 4% Total resolved 23/25 92% 

Manipulation is considered successful if both (i) the predicted class switches to the target, i.e., arg max c p(c | x, a ′) = ctarget ,and (ii) ∆p > 0.1. The ∆p threshold prevents counting marginal flips caused by near-ties among classes. The baseline comparison (Table 19) validates that success requires correct filter selection from MANIFESTATION analysis random selection achieves 0% success under identical conditions. 

## F. Additional Experimental Details 

F.1. Model Architectures VAE (CelebA): 

• Encoder: 4 residual blocks (128, 256, 512, 512 channels), GroupNorm, SiLU activation • Latent: 512 × 32 × 32 (spatially-averaged to R512 for analysis) • Decoder: 4 residual blocks with upsampling, symmetric to encoder • Training: β-VAE with β = 1 , Adam optimizer, 3 epochs 42 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability 

CNN (CIFAR-10): 

• Conv1: 32 filters, 3 × 3, BatchNorm, ReLU, MaxPool • Conv2: 64 filters, 3 × 3, BatchNorm, ReLU, MaxPool • Conv3: 128 filters, 3 × 3, BatchNorm, ReLU, MaxPool • FC: 2048 → 256 → 10 • Training: Adam optimizer (lr = 10 −3, weight decay 5 × 10 −4), 50 epochs, 84.66% test accuracy 

F.2. Manifestation Unit Statistics  

> Table 26. Manifestation Unit statistics by architecture.

Statistic VAE CNN Components analyzed 512 224 Concepts in vocabulary 40 10 Manifestation Units 512 224 Indexed template entries 2,048 943 High-correlation pairs ( |ρ| > 0.7) 73,243 12,847 Semantic families discovered 20 per-layer 

F.3. Evaluation Query Sets 

We constructed two query sets per architecture: 

Automatic Evaluation (50 single-turn queries): Used for retrieval and generation metrics (Precision@k, Recall@k, NDCG, BLEU, ROUGE, BERTScore, faithfulness). • Entity queries (20): “What does dimension 47 encode?” • Concept queries (15): “Which dimensions relate to smiling?” • Relationship queries (10): “What dimensions are antagonistic to eyeglasses?” • Manipulation queries (5): “How do I make a face smile?” 

Human & LLM-as-Judge Evaluation (50 multi-turn conversational queries): Organized into conversations testing conversational capabilities: • Pronoun resolution : “What does dimension 63 encode?” → “Is it part of a family?” • Context switching : Tracking multiple dimensions across turns • Multi-dimension tracking : “Compare these two dimensions” • Progressive deep-dive : “Show me its top correlations” → “Tell me more about the first one” • Implicit references : “Any other dimensions with similar behavior?” 

Note: The retrieval traces in Appx. C.6 use a separate set of 50 example queries for illustration purposes; these are distinct from the evaluation sets described above. 43 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability 

F.4. GPT-2 Manipulation: Per-Behaviour Summary 

Table 27 is the headline result for the GPT-2 instantiation: across five distinct IOI-style behaviours, framework-retrieved heads at recommended budget k beat matched-budget random head sets by 1.75 –4.49 ×. The G-field intervention method (mean ablation or path patching) is chosen per behaviour based on the oracle signal type stored in the MU’s D-field. All five experiments were pre-registered with SHA-256-hashed predictions before outcomes were computed; hashes are stored in 

GPT2/output/validation phases/ .                                        

> Table 27. GPT-2 manipulation results. Framework versus matched-budget random heads (mean of 3random trials throughout); “intervention” is the G-field method. Lift =|framework shift |/|random shift |. Absolute scale: IOI path-patching restores 40 .9% versus
> 23 .3% random; bigram adds +0 .211 versus +0 .051 nats. *Bounded by baseline ceiling 0.97 .Behaviour Intervention kLift Pass Induction copying loss mean ablation 33.14 ×✓
> IO-token routing mean ablation 10 4.49 ×✓
> Bigram modelling mean ablation 50 4.11 ×✓
> Induction copying acc. mean ablation 32.00 ×*✓
> IOI logit-difference path patching 30 1.75 ×✓

Per-behaviour setup. Sample sizes: 20 Olsson-style repeated-token sequences (length 30 ) for induction-copying tests; 30 

Wang-style IOI templates for IO-token routing and IOI logit-difference; 80 paired clean/corrupted prompts (BABA corrup-tion) for path-patching IOI; 20 WikiText samples for bigram-prediction loss. Ablation budgets k per behaviour are derived from the head-count sweep on the same data and stored in each MU’s D-field as recommended budget k . Random-head baselines use matched budget with seeds {4242 , 4243 , 4244 } (mean ablation experiments) and {9000 , 9017 , 9034 }

(path-patching experiments). The concept-vocabulary pivot that populates S (3/16 → 13 /16 reference-head recovery) is documented below. 

F.5. Per-Architecture Instantiation Table 

Table 28 gives the per-architecture instantiation of the MU schema across the three studied architectures. (E, S, R, D, G )

are preserved; T is populated only for transformer architectures, the only field whose content type substantively changes is S

(categorical class-associations → functional/positional pattern scores), with corresponding shifts in D (Transformer-derived metrics) and G (architecture-natural intervention type). 

GPT-2 concept-vocabulary pivot: details. The GPT-2 row of Table 28 required a vocabulary pivot during pilot construc-tion. We document the pivot here as a methodological lesson rather than a finding: the schema (E, S, R, D, G, T ) transfers across architectures, but the S-primitive must match the architecture’s natural feature axes. 

Initial S-primitive (surface). The first GPT-2 extraction populated S for each of the 144 attention heads with associations to 48 surface linguistic concepts, computed over 3,000 WikiText-103 samples. The surface vocabulary covered standard linguistic categories: part-of-speech tags (e.g., noun , verb , adjective ), syntactic dependency labels ( subject ,

object , modifier ), token-level features ( punctuation , capitalized , numeric , rare token ), and corpus-frequency bands. Association strength was Pearson correlation between per-token attention weights and the binary concept indicator. This vocabulary is well-suited to feed-forward analyses of token representations but proved inadequate for attention heads, whose computation is positional and relational rather than categorical over surface form. 

Reference set. We evaluated S against a literature reference set of 16 attention heads with documented mechanistic roles: induction heads from Olsson et al. (2022) and the IOI-circuit heads from Wang et al. (2023), including name-mover heads (L09 H06, L09 H09, L10 H00), backup-name-mover heads (L10 H10, L11 H02), S-inhibition heads (L07 H03, L07 H09, L08 H06, L08 H10), and induction heads (L05 H05, L05 H08, L06 H09, L07 H02). A head was scored as “recovered” if its primary S-association exceeded r> 0.30 on the corresponding functional axis. The surface-concept vocabulary recovered only 3/16 heads at this threshold; the recovered three were heads whose surface correlations happened to align with their functional role (e.g., a name-mover head correlating with proper-noun tokens). 

Revised S-primitive (functional). We pivoted to four MI-derived functional concepts, defined relative to attention output rather than token surface form: 44 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability 

Table 28. Per-architecture instantiation of the MU schema. Base Slot structure (E, S, R, D, G ) is preserved; T extends the schema for GPT-2; the S-field’s content type adapts (categorical → functional/positional), and the G-field stores architecture-natural intervention parameters (amplification → ablation/path-patching). Indexed-template counts: 4 retrieval fields per component plus pairwise relationship docs.                                                                 

> Aspect VAE (CelebA) CNN (CIFAR-10) GPT-2 (124M)
> Architecture Encoder/Latent/Decoder 3 conv layers (32/64/128 filters) 12 layers ×12 heads Component shape 512 latent dims 224 filters total 144 attention heads
> Manifestation Unit fields
> S-primitive type categorical (class-assoc.) categorical (class-assoc.) functional/positional pattern
> S-content Pearson corr. with 40 attrs class-selectivity over 10 labels attn. to induction-target / IO-pos / prev / self
> R-content 512 2activation corr. pairwise corr. within / cross layer head-head corr. + joint-ablation synergy
> D-metadata variance, family ID cluster ID, layer position induction / copying scores, ∆ppl, rec. k
> Family structure 20 Ward clusters per-layer clusters induction / name-mover / prev / sink roles
> G-intervention latent edit, σ-step filter amplification ( α)zero / mean / path-patching Samples for S1,000 (val) 10,000 (test) 30 Olsson + 30 IOI + 30 WikiText †
> Retrieval / interface
> # of MUs 512 224 144 Indexed templates 2,048 docs 943 docs 583 docs (4 doc-types per head + 7 rel.) Embedding model Sentence-BERT (384d) Sentence-BERT (384d) Sentence-BERT (384d) LLM backend Qwen3-8B Qwen3-8B Qwen3-8B (RAG built; pilot validates retrieval+manipulation, not full LLM-grounded chat)
> Manipulation example
> Query example “make smile” “make this look like a dog” “which heads copy earlier tokens?” Selected components Dims 424, 229 Filters 81, 39, 122 L05 H05, L06 H09, L05 H01 Validation decode →visual forward →probability shift behavioural metric vs. random
> †For GPT-2 the S-field’s content type required a vocabulary pivot from surface linguistic concepts to MI-derived functional concepts; details below.

• Attention-to-induction-target : per-head fraction of attention mass placed on the token whose copy would complete an induction pattern (e.g., for prompt A B ...A , attention to B). Computed on Olsson-style repeated-token sequences. • IO-position : per-head fraction of attention mass placed on the indirect-object position in IOI templates (Wang et al., 2023), distinguishing IO-attending heads from S-attending and end-token-attending heads. • Previous-token : per-head fraction of attention mass placed at offset −1 from the current position, capturing the previous-token-attending pattern documented in Elhage et al. (2021). • Self : per-head fraction of attention mass placed at the current position (offset 0), which decomposes attention sinks and copy-suppression heads. These four primitives were measured on a smaller multi-distribution sample (30 Olsson-style sequences + 30 IOI templates + 30 WikiText samples; see Table 28). With this vocabulary, S recovered 13 /16 reference heads at r> 0.30 . The three unrecovered heads (one backup-name-mover and two S-inhibition heads) require richer relational primitives that the four functional concepts do not capture; these are documented in App. F.4 and would naturally be addressed by SAE-feature S at scale. 

Lesson. The vocabulary-pivot is reported in this paper because it is the methodologically informative part of the GPT-2 pilot. The schema (E, S, R, D, G ) is preserved without modification; only the S-content adapts, and the appropriate S-primitive is determined by the architecture rather than chosen in advance. We expect the same observation to apply at frontier scale, where SAE features computed against the model’s own residual stream are likely to be the natural S-primitive for transformer-based MI (Lieberum et al., 2024; Cunningham et al., 2024). 

Practical guidance for S-primitive selection. The concept vocabulary for S should be drawn from the space of outputs 

a component type produces, not the surface features of inputs that happen to activate it. For attention heads : attention-routing primitives over position-types (induction-target, IO-position, previous-token, self). For convolutional filters :class-conditional activation statistics (selectivity scores over the label space). For SAE features or linear projections :reconstruction weights over a fixed basis. Surface linguistic features (POS tags, dependency labels) are appropriate only for components whose primary function is categorical discrimination over surface form; using them for positional routers (attention heads) causes the 3/16 → 13 /16 failure documented here. When the right primitive is unclear, a pilot recovery 45 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability 

test against a small literature reference set (as used here) provides a principled falsification criterion before committing to the full extraction. 

F.6. CNN Categorical Structure 

The conv3 cosine similarity matrix on CIFAR-10, computed directly from the stored selectivity vectors, recovers the vehicle/animal block structure (Fig. 22): vehicles (airplane, automobile, ship, truck) form a cluster with mean off-diagonal cosine 0.86 (peak 0.92 at auto ↔truck), animals (bird, cat, deer, dog, frog, horse) cluster with mean 0.85 (peak 0.97 at cat ↔dog), and cross-category pairs are markedly less similar (mean 0.72 , min 0.59 at airplane ↔frog). This is the CNN analogue of GPT-2’s per-layer IOI mediation result (§F.4, Fig. 23).  

> Figure 22. Pairwise cosine similarity of conv3 class-selectivity vectors from the stored MU class-conditional means. Vehicle and animal blocks emerge without supervision and mirror the within-category failure pattern in Fig. 3.

F.7. GPT-2 Per-Layer IOI Mediation 

We patch all 12 attention heads in each layer simultaneously with their corrupted-prompt activations (BABA corruption, 

n = 80 prompt pairs) and measure the fraction of clean-prompt IOI logit-difference effect restored (Goldowsky-Dill et al., 2023; Heimersheim & Nanda, 2024). Per-layer mediation peaks at layers 7 (16 .9% ), 8 (22 .3% ), and 9 (29 .4% ), matching the layer hotspot of Wang et al. (2023) for GPT-2’s IOI circuit (Fig. 23). Layers 0–5 contribute marginally; layers 

10 –11 show small or slightly negative effects (consistent with backup-name-mover behaviour at these positions). Random matched-budget head sets recover −0.3% to +1 .6% across trials, providing a clean null baseline. 

F.8. Embedding Stability: Default vs Qwen3-Embedding-8B 

Figure 24 compares per-field paraphrase stability under two embedding models: the default Sentence-BERT (MiniLM, v5) and Qwen3-Embedding-8B (v6). Stability is measured as Spearman ρ between head rankings on paraphrase query pairs (left panel) and as Jaccard@30 (right panel). The T field was not run under v5. Qwen3 resolves the instability of E (0.35 

→ 0.84) and D (0.58 → 0.80) while preserving the already-high stability of R (0.86 → 0.93). Fused-query stability also improves substantially (0.50 → 0.85). The 0.7 threshold line marks the minimum acceptable stability for production use; all v6 fields clear this threshold. 46 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 

## GPT-2 layer (all 12 heads in layer patched) 

−20 

−10 

0

10 

20 

30 

> \% IOI effect restored

17% 

22% 

29% 

Wang et al.\ (2022) IOI hotspot (L7--L9) 

Figure 23. Per-layer IOI mediation in GPT-2 under BABA path-patching ( n=80 prompt pairs). The framework’s retrieval surfaces a peak at layers 7-9 ( 16 .9% , 22 .3% , 29 .4% effect restored), reproducing the IOI-circuit hotspot documented by Wang et al. (2023). E S R D G T FUSED 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0  

> Spearman  (paraphrase pairs)  +0.49
> +0.11
> +0.07
> +0.22 +0.22
> 0.7 threshold

A Paraphrase stability Spearman       

> Default embedding (v5)
> Qwen3-Embedding-8B (v6)
> Fused (default)
> Fused (Qwen3)
> ESRDGTFUSED

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

> Jaccard @k=30 (paraphrase pairs)
> +0.16
> +0.08
> -0.13
> +0.13
> +0.19
> 0.7 threshold

B Paraphrase stability Jaccard@k=30 

Embedding sensitivity: Qwen3-Embedding-8B resolves instability across all fields (T field added in v6) 

Figure 24. Embedding sensitivity: per-field paraphrase stability (Spearman ρ, left; Jaccard@30, right) for default Sentence-BERT (light blue) vs Qwen3-Embedding-8B (dark blue). Fused-query bars shown separately (orange/red). Dashed line at 0.7 marks acceptable stability threshold. T field was not run in v5; Qwen3 resolves instability in E and D and raises fused stability from 0.50 to 0.85. 

47 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability 

F.9. Decomposition Quality: Field Merging Comparison 

Figure 25 shows that the six-field ESRDGT decomposition is a strict optimum: merging fields into coarser groupings degrades oracle recall@30 significantly. Pair merging (ES |RD |GT) drops recall by −0.071 (p=0 .005 ∗∗ ); type merging (text |struct |num) by −0.054 (p=0 .028 ∗). All-merged reduces recall similarly ( −0.054 ) but is not individually significant (p=0 .128 ), likely due to overlap with the other merged conditions. The result supports keeping individual field granularity: the decomposition is not arbitrary—collapsing it loses retrieval power. ESRDG      

> 6-field
> (baseline)
> Pair merge
> (ES|RD|GT)
> Type merge
> (text|struct|num)
> All merged
> (1 group)
> 0.00
> 0.05
> 0.10
> 0.15
> 0.20
> 0.25
> Oracle recall @k=30  baseline
> =0.071
> p=0.005**
> =0.054
> p=0.028*
> =0.054
> p=0.128 n.s.
> AField decomposition quality: ESRDG vs merged groupings
> (each merged config reduces recall significantly, p<0.05 for pair/type merges)
> ESRDG baseline = 0.196
> Merging fields degrades recall individual ESRDG decomposition is optimal

Figure 25. Field decomposition quality: oracle recall@30 for the ESRDGT 6-field baseline vs three merged-field configurations. All merges degrade recall; pair-merge and type-merge are statistically significant ( p < 0.05 ). Dashed line marks baseline recall. Significant reductions confirm that the individual-field decomposition is the optimal granularity. 

## G. Path-Patching Analysis 

This appendix reports the full path-patching causal-mediation analysis on GPT-2’s IOI circuit, supplementing the scope paragraph in §5.4 and the limitations discussion in §6. 

G.1. Budget-Matched Comparison at Variable k

Table 29 compares the fraction of clean-prompt IOI logit-difference restored ( frac restored ) for three head sets across retrieval budgets k ∈ { 7, 15 , 20 , 30 }: FRAMEWORK NL (top-k heads retrieved by our structured query); the oracle set (the 7 canonical IOI name-mover heads from Wang et al. (2023)); and random matched-budget heads (mean of 3 seeds). 

Table 29. Path-patching frac restored at variable retrieval budget k (n=80 BABA prompt pairs). Oracle set is fixed at 7 heads regardless of k; framework and random vary with k.

Head set k=7 k=15 k=20 k=30 

Oracle (7 name-movers, fixed) 0.117 0.117 0.117 0.117 FRAMEWORK NL (top-k retrieved) 0.037 0.088 0.182 0.409 Random matched-budget (mean) ≈0.05 ≈0.11 ≈0.16 0.233 

At the oracle-set-matched point ( k=7 , set size of the canonical circuit, not the retrieval budget), FRAMEWORK NL restores only 0.037 vs the oracle’s 0.117 —the framework loses to the oracle at oracle-set-matched k=7 . The apparently strong 

k=30 result ( 0.409 vs random 0.233 ) reflects a 4.3× larger head set rather than per-head causal enrichment, and should not be read as evidence of mechanistic precision. 48 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability 

G.2. Layer-Wise Mediation 

Per-layer IOI mediation (all 12 heads per layer simultaneously patched) peaks at layers 7 ( 16 .9% ), 8 ( 22 .3% ), and 9 (29 .4% ), consistent with the L7–9 name-mover hotspot of Wang et al. (2023). Layers 10–11 show small or slightly negative contributions, consistent with backup-name-mover behaviour. This layer-wise curve is shown in Fig. 23 (App. F.4). 

G.3. Per-Field Causal Enrichment ( test g )

Table 30 reports whether heads retrieved by each individual field are causally enriched for IOI mediation, tested against a field-matched random baseline using a one-sided t-test with Bonferroni correction across fields and strategies.                  

> Table 30. Per-field causal enrichment ( test g ): Bonferroni-corrected p-values across all 6 fields and retrieval strategies. All tests fail to reject the null ( H0: field-retrieved heads are not causally enriched over matched-budget random).
> Field Strategy Bonferroni p
> Eall strategies 1.0 Sall strategies 1.0 Rall strategies 1.0 Dall strategies 1.0 Gall strategies 1.0 Tall strategies 1.0

All 6 fields produce p=1 .0 after Bonferroni correction: no individual field retrieves a head set that is causally enriched for IOI path-patching beyond what a random matched-budget set would achieve. 

G.4. Mechanistic Interpretation 

Three factors explain this null result without invalidating the framework: 

(1) The IOI circuit is intrinsically distributed. The 7 canonical oracle name-mover heads themselves restore only 

frac restored =0 .117 . No small head set, however well-chosen, will restore a large fraction of the IOI logit-difference because the circuit distributes the computation across many heads and layers. 

(2) T -field primitives are correlated with but not equal to path-patching scores. The T -field encodes attention-pattern features (induction/copying scores, QK/OV circuit norms, position ratios). These correlate with mechanistic roles but are not optimised to predict frac restored . A T -field populated directly from path-patching scores—possible in principle, costly in practice—would close this gap. 

(3) Retrieval enrichment ̸ = causal enrichment. The framework is designed to surface heads with structured mechanistic descriptions, not to maximise path-patching recovery. The oracle recall result (5/7 L7–9 name-movers recovered at k=30 )and the behavioural lift results (Table 27) confirm that retrieval enrichment is real; the path-patching null result says only that this enrichment does not translate to per-head causal superiority over random within the distributed IOI circuit. 

## H. Field-Level Oracle Discriminability 

This analysis tests whether oracle heads (the 7 canonical IOI name-mover heads) are statistically distinguishable from randomly-drawn heads using each field’s own stored statistics, independent of query-based retrieval. Two scoring modes are used: hand (hand-crafted per-field scoring, query-conditioned for D and T ) and learned (logistic-regression probability fit on oracle vs. non-oracle heads). A one-sided Mann-Whitney U -test is used; no Bonferroni correction is applied (exploratory). 

Interpretation. D is the only field whose stored statistics consistently discriminate oracle from random heads across both modes. This is not contradicted by the ablation finding that D interferes with retrieval: D encodes information correlated with oracle-head identity (induction scores, copying scores, ∆ppl) but when used as a retrieval basis, its dynamics vocabulary attracts non-oracle heads with high numeric activity, adding noise. T discriminates in learned mode only, suggesting its attention-pattern features partially recover the oracle signal when fit to the oracle set—but not under general query-based retrieval. 

Caveat. Learned-mode scores are fit directly on the oracle set and are not query-conditioned; these results are exploratory and should not be read as retrieval benchmarks. 49 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability                                     

> Table 31. Field-level oracle discriminability ( p-values, Mann-Whitney U, oracle vs. random heads). Dis significant in both modes; T
> significant in learned mode only. Bold = p< 0.05 .
> Hand Learned Field mean oracle pmean oracle p
> E2.157 0.399 0.438 0.111 S5.351 0.129 0.373 0.833 R1.719 0.750 0.507 0.256
> D0.667 0.002 0.622 0.025
> G1.923 0.367 0.492 0.405 T−0.001 0.853 0.554 0.011

## I. Per-Field Singleton Retrieval 

This appendix reports field-level singleton retrieval performance: each field queried alone, without combination, against the 7-head IOI oracle set. Data are from the Qwen3-Embedding-8B (v6) configuration. 

I.1. Oracle Recall and MRR per Field                              

> Table 32. Per-field singleton oracle retrieval on GPT-2 ESRDGT schema (Qwen3-Embedding-8B). Oracle set: 7 canonical IOI L7–9 name-mover heads. Each field queried independently; no field combination.
> Field Recall@7 Recall@15 Recall@30 MRR
> E (Entity) 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.014 S (Semantics) 0.000 0.000 0.143 0.016 R (Relations) 0.000 0.000 0.429 0.025 D (Descriptor) 0.143 0.143 0.286 0.040 G (Guidance) 0.000 0.000 0.143 0.024 T (Attention) 0.143 0.143 0.286 0.057

I.2. Field–Function Dissociation 

Table 32 reveals a dissociation between set retrieval (recall@30) and first-rank retrieval (MRR): 

R dominates set retrieval. R achieves the highest recall@30 ( 0.429 , recovering 3/7 oracle heads), indicating that the relational field—encoding head-to-head activation correlations and joint-ablation synergies—captures the most oracle-head signal when used alone. 

T and D lead first-rank retrieval. T achieves the highest MRR ( 0.057 ) followed by D (0.040 ), meaning that the attention-pattern primitives and descriptor metadata are most likely to place an oracle head at the very top of the ranking. R’s MRR (0.025 ) is notably lower than its recall@30, confirming that R recovers oracle heads by casting a wide net rather than by precision ranking. 

E retrieves nothing. E (entity name / head identifier) achieves recall@30 = 0 .000 and MRR = 0 .014 , consistent with the finding that entity labels do not carry mechanistic information at singleton resolution—and with the LOO result that removing E from the full schema improves recall (it actively interferes). This dissociation has a practical implication: if the goal is broad oracle head coverage (retrieval recall), R is the single most informative field; if the goal is precise first-hit ranking (MRR), T and D should be weighted more heavily. The minimal-optimal S+R combination benefits from both: R’s wide net and S’s complementary, weakly anti-correlated head ranking ( ρ=−0.20 , Fig. 5B). Figure 26 visualises both panels: grouped recall bars at k ∈ { 7, 15 , 30 } per field (left) and MRR per field (right). 50 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability E S R D G T             

> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> Oracle recall
> 0.14
> 0.43
> 0.29
> 0.14
> 0.29
> APer-field singleton oracle recall (Qwen3)
> Random @k=7 (1/7)
> Recall@k=7
> Recall@k=15
> Recall@k=30
> ESRDGT
> 0.00
> 0.01
> 0.02
> 0.03
> 0.04
> 0.05
> 0.06
> 0.07
> Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR)
> 0.0141 0.0157
> 0.0252
> 0.0403
> 0.0243
> 0.0565
> BPer-field MRR (Qwen3 singleton)
> Thighest MRR (0.057)
> D2nd (0.040)
> R3rd (0.025), best recall@30
> E, S, G lower MRR
> Singleton field retrieval (Qwen3): R dominates recall@30; T/D lead MRR field function dissociation

Figure 26. Per-field singleton oracle retrieval (Qwen3-Embedding-8B). Left: grouped oracle recall at k=7 (light blue), k=15 (medium blue), k=30 (dark blue). R dominates recall@30 ( 0.43 ); E retrieves nothing at any k. Right: per-field MRR. T leads ( 0.057 ), followed by D (0.040 ) and R (0.025 ). The dissociation between recall-leadership ( R) and MRR-leadership ( T , D) reflects different retrieval modes: R casts a wide net; T /D place oracle heads at the top of the ranking. 

## J. Metric Definitions 

We organize evaluation metrics into two groups: automatic metrics for system performance, and human/LLM rating dimensions for explanation quality. Table 33 summarizes both groups. 

Table 33. Evaluation metrics organized by type. 

Type Category Metrics Automatic Retrieval (4) Precision@k, Recall@k, F1@k, NDCG Generation (5) Gen-F1, BLEU, ROUGE-1, ROUGE-2, ROUGE-L Semantic (7) BERT-P, BERT-R, BERT-F1, 1/2/3-gram overlap, Semantic Sim, Avg Sim Faithfulness (2) Attribution Score, Factual Accuracy Human/LLM (7) Comprehensibility, Faithfulness, Correctness, Usefulness, Specificity, Trustworthiness, Coherence 

J.1. Retrieval Metrics Precision@k : Fraction of retrieved units that are relevant. Precision@k = |Retrieved k ∩ Relevant |

k (16) 

Recall@k : Fraction of relevant units that are retrieved. Recall@k = |Retrieved k ∩ Relevant ||Relevant | (17) 

F1@k : Harmonic mean of Precision@k and Recall@k. 

NDCG : Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain, measuring ranking quality with position-based discounting. 

Gold Set Construction. Relevant units are defined as the gold set constructed by matching ground-truth entity IDs, concept labels, and relationship structures for each query: 51 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability 

• For entity queries (e.g., “What does dimension 47 encode?”), the gold set contains the single matching MU. • For concept queries (e.g., “Which dimensions relate to smiling?”), the gold set contains all MUs where the target concept appears in the top-m associations. • For relationship queries (e.g., “What dimensions are antagonistic to eyeglasses?”), the gold set contains the top-r

neighbors in Rk whose correlation sign matches the query label (synergistic or antagonistic). Gold sets were constructed programmatically from the extracted Manifestation Units. The comparison against BM25-hybrid and unstructured-text baselines (Table 1) controls for the shared data: those baselines have identical access to the same per-component statistics but achieve only 18–20% precision, confirming that the structured S-field separation—not circular access to the gold-set content—drives the retrieval advantage. 

J.2. Generation Metrics BLEU : n-gram precision with brevity penalty, computed using SacreBLEU (Post, 2018). 

ROUGE-1/2/L : Recall-oriented n-gram overlap (unigram, bigram, longest common subsequence). 

Gen-F1 : Token-level F1 between generated and reference responses. 

J.3. Semantic Similarity Metrics BERTScore : Contextual embedding similarity using BERT (Zhang et al., 2020). We report Precision (BERT-P), Recall (BERT-R), and F1 (BERT-F1). 

n-gram Overlap : Exact n-gram match ratios for n ∈ { 1, 2, 3}.

Semantic Sim : Cosine similarity between sentence embeddings (Sentence-BERT). 

J.4. Faithfulness Metrics Factual Accuracy : Binary metric indicating whether all quoted statistics in the response exactly match values in the retrieved Manifestation Unit fields. We verify both numeric values (correlations, selectivity scores) and discrete labels (cluster IDs, synergistic/antagonistic classifications). Computed by extracting values from responses and verifying against serialized (E, S, R, D, G ) fields. 

Attribution Score : Fraction of response claims that can be attributed to retrieved content. We adapted the RAGAS faithfulness measure, which computes entailment between individual response statements and the retrieved context (Es et al., 2024). 

J.5. Human and LLM-as-Judge Metrics 

We adapt seven dimensions from the Explanation Satisfaction framework (Hoffman et al., 2023): • Comprehensibility : Is the explanation easy to understand? • Faithfulness : Does the explanation accurately reflect the model’s behavior? • Correctness : Are the stated facts accurate? • Usefulness : Does the explanation help accomplish the user’s goal? • Specificity : Does the explanation provide sufficient detail? • Trustworthiness : Can the user trust this explanation? • Coherence : Is the explanation logically organized? All dimensions are rated on 5-point Likert scales (1=Strongly Disagree, 5=Strongly Agree). 52 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability 

## K. Human Evaluation Details 

Tables 34 and 35 present complete human evaluation results across all seven dimensions and three expertise levels.                                                                           

> Table 34. VAE system human evaluation scores by expertise level (315 total evaluations). Beginners rate most favorably; experts apply stricter standards across all metrics.
> Metric Beginner Intermediate Expert Average
> Comprehensibility 4.08 4.19 3.75 4.01 Faithfulness 4.19 4.04 3.87 4.03 Correctness 4.29 4.23 3.63 4.05 Usefulness 3.89 4.07 3.50 3.82 Specificity 4.23 4.13 4.05 4.14 Trustworthiness 4.16 3.98 3.55 3.90 Coherence 4.38 4.13 3.96 4.16
> Overall 4.17 4.11 3.76 4.01
> Table 35. CNN system human evaluation scores by expertise level (297 total evaluations). Pattern mirrors VAE results with expertise gap of 0.65 points between beginners and experts.
> Metric Beginner Intermediate Expert Average
> Comprehensibility 4.48 4.05 3.69 4.07 Faithfulness 4.33 3.96 3.90 4.06 Correctness 4.45 3.99 3.72 4.05 Usefulness 4.31 3.89 3.57 3.92 Specificity 4.42 4.08 3.88 4.13 Trustworthiness 4.43 3.87 3.60 3.97 Coherence 4.39 4.11 3.89 4.13
> Overall 4.40 4.00 3.75 4.05

Figure 27 illustrates the expertise effect across metrics for the CNN system, showing consistent pattern where beginners rate highest and experts most critically. Figure 28 shows score distributions via box plots, revealing that experts exhibit higher variance in their ratings, particularly for Trustworthiness and Usefulness. Figure 29 presents the average scores across metrics for the VAE system. 

K.1. Inter-Rater Reliability Analysis 

To assess the consistency of human evaluations, we compute standard inter-rater reliability (IRR) metrics across all evaluators. Tables 36 and 37 present comprehensive IRR statistics for both systems. K.1.1. IRR M ETRICS 

We report four complementary reliability measures: • ICC(2,1) : Intraclass Correlation Coefficient for single rater reliability under a two-way random effects model (Shrout & Fleiss, 1979). • ICC(2,k) : ICC for the average of k raters, indicating reliability of mean ratings. • Krippendorff’s α: A versatile reliability coefficient suitable for ordinal data (Krippendorff, 2011). • Fleiss’ κ: Multi-rater extension of Cohen’s kappa for categorical agreement (Fleiss, 1971). We additionally report pairwise agreement rates: exact agreement (identical ratings) and within-1 agreement (ratings differing by at most 1 point on the 5-point scale). 53 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability Comprehensibility        

> Faithfulness
> Correctness
> Usefulness
> Specificity
> Trustworthiness
> Coherence
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> Average Score (1-5)
> 4.37 4.33
> 4.55
> 4.20
> 4.51 4.43 4.42
> 4.03 4.14 4.12 4.00
> 3.74
> 4.07
> 3.90
> 3.59
> 3.90 3.81
> 3.57
> 4.01
> 3.60
> 3.82
> Human Evaluation Scores by Expertise Level
> Beginner
> Intermediate
> Expert

Figure 27. CNN system human evaluation scores by expertise level. Beginners (teal) consistently rate higher than intermediates (orange) and experts (purple) across all seven metrics. 

K.1.2. VAE S YSTEM INTER -R ATER RELIABILITY 

Table 36. Inter-rater reliability metrics for VAE system (9 evaluators, 315 evaluations). Low traditional IRR metrics reflect systematic expertise-level calibration differences rather than random disagreement; within-1 agreement exceeds 75% across all dimensions. 

Metric ICC(2,1) ICC(2,k) Kripp. α Fleiss’ κ Exact Within-1 

Comprehensibility 0.046 0.301 0.025 −0.024 33.8% 81.4% Faithfulness 0.063 0.376 0.008 −0.030 30.3% 75.7% Correctness 0.079 0.435 0.020 −0.019 32.1% 79.1% Usefulness 0.108 0.520 0.080 0.001 33.8% 78.1% Specificity 0.077 0.429 0.018 −0.027 32.4% 79.6% Trustworthiness 0.040 0.272 −0.001 −0.026 29.2% 76.0% Coherence 0.047 0.308 −0.001 −0.029 32.9% 79.2% 

Average 0.066 0.377 0.021 −0.022 32.1% 78.4% 

K.1.3. CNN S YSTEM INTER -R ATER RELIABILITY 

Table 37 presents inter-rater reliability metrics for the CNN system across 9 evaluators and 297 total evaluations. The pattern closely mirrors VAE results, with low traditional IRR metrics but strong within-1 agreement (75.9% average), confirming that the expertise-driven calibration effects observed in VAE evaluation generalize across architectures. 

Table 37. Inter-rater reliability metrics for CNN system (9 evaluators, 297 evaluations). Pattern mirrors VAE results, confirming that expertise-driven calibration differences are consistent across architectures. 

Metric ICC(2,1) ICC(2,k) Kripp. α Fleiss’ κ Exact Within-1 

Comprehensibility 0.030 0.220 −0.035 −0.004 31.0% 72.6% Faithfulness 0.056 0.348 −0.032 −0.024 33.5% 80.3% Correctness 0.071 0.406 0.002 −0.004 34.4% 77.9% Usefulness 0.094 0.483 0.035 0.004 30.1% 72.3% Specificity 0.045 0.299 −0.012 −0.014 32.5% 78.9% Trustworthiness 0.082 0.446 −0.003 −0.010 31.1% 72.5% Coherence 0.039 0.266 −0.016 −0.011 31.9% 76.6% 

Average 0.060 0.353 −0.009 −0.009 32.1% 75.9% 

54 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability compre. 

> faith.
> correc.
> useful.
> specif.
> trust.
> cohere.
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> Rating
> Beginner
> compre.
> faith.
> correc.
> useful.
> specif.
> trust.
> cohere.
> Intermediate
> compre.
> faith.
> correc.
> useful.
> specif.
> trust.
> cohere.
> Expert
> Score Distribution by Expertise Level

Figure 28. Score distribution by expertise level for CNN system. Box plots reveal experts (purple) have wider score distributions, reflecting more nuanced evaluation criteria. 

Figure 29. VAE system average evaluation scores across all seven metrics. All dimensions exceed 3.8/5.0, with Coherence (4.16) and Specificity (4.14) rated highest; Usefulness (3.82) rated lowest but still above neutral. 

K.1.4. I NTERPRETATION 

Following established benchmarks (Cicchetti, 1994; Landis & Koch, 1977), ICC values below 0.40 indicate poor reliability, while Krippendorff’s α below 0.667 suggests only tentative conclusions. Our results show low traditional IRR metrics (average ICC(2,1) = 0.066 for VAE, 0.060 for CNN), which initially appears concerning. However, this pattern reflects a well-documented phenomenon in subjective evaluation studies: systematic rater calibration differences rather than random disagreement (Graham et al., 2015). K.1.5. U NDERSTANDING LOW TRADITIONAL IRR WITH HIGH PRACTICAL AGREEMENT 

Three key observations explain this apparent paradox: 

(1) Systematic Expertise Effect: As documented in Sec. K, experts consistently rate 0.4–0.6 points lower than beginners across all metrics. This systematic offset inflates between-rater variance, reducing ICC and Krippendorff’s α, even though raters agree on relative quality ordering. 

(2) High Within-1 Agreement: Despite low traditional metrics, within-1 agreement rates of 78.4% (VAE) and 75.9% 55 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability ICC(2,1) ICC(2,k) Krippendorff Fleiss                      

> IRR Metric
> comprehensibility
> faithfulness
> correctness
> usefulness
> specificity
> trustworthiness
> coherence
> Quality Dimension
> 0.046 0.301 0.025 -0.024
> 0.063 0.376 0.008 -0.030
> 0.079 0.435 0.020 -0.018
> 0.107 0.520 0.080 0.001
> 0.077 0.429 0.018 -0.027
> 0.040 0.272 -0.001 -0.026
> 0.047 0.308 -0.001 -0.029

Inter-Rater Reliability Metrics by Quality Dimension 

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Reliability Coefficient

Figure 30. VAE system inter-rater reliability heatmap. Traditional metrics (ICC, Krippendorff’s α, Fleiss’ κ) show low values due to systematic expertise-level calibration differences, not random disagreement. 

(CNN) demonstrate that evaluators rarely disagree by more than one point. For 5-point Likert scales, this represents strong practical agreement—a difference between rating 4 vs. 5 is qualitatively minor. 

(3) Metric Ranking Concordance: Kendall’s W coefficients of 0.260 (VAE) and 0.083 (CNN) indicate that while absolute scores differ by expertise level, evaluators show agreement on which quality dimensions perform better or worse. All groups consistently rate Coherence and Specificity highest, while Usefulness and Trustworthiness receive the lowest ratings. K.1.6. P RECEDENT IN XAI E VALUATION LITERATURE 

Low traditional IRR metrics are common in explainable AI evaluation studies. Hoffman et al. (2023) report similar patterns when evaluating explanation satisfaction, noting that expertise-driven calibration differences are expected and informative. The systematic nature of our expertise effect—where experts apply stricter but internally consistent standards—validates our stratified evaluation design rather than indicating measurement failure. K.1.7. S UMMARY 

Our IRR analysis reveals that traditional IRR metrics (ICC ≈ 0.06, Krippendorff’s α ≈ 0.01) are low due to systematic expertise-level calibration, not random noise. Within-1 agreement rates of 76–78% indicate strong practical consistency. The expertise gap is a feature, not a bug: experts appropriately apply stricter evaluation criteria to AI-generated explanations. Cross-architecture consistency (similar patterns for VAE and CNN) supports the reliability of our evaluation methodology. We recommend that future XAI evaluation studies report both traditional IRR metrics and practical agreement rates, while stratifying by evaluator expertise to capture meaningful calibration differences. 

## L. LLM-as-Judge Evaluation 

We compare human evaluations with two LLM judges: Claude-Opus and GPT-5.1. Table 38 and Table 39 present the full comparison. 

GPT-2 BM25 baseline (oracle recall@ k). Table 42 reports BM25 lexical retrieval on the GPT-2 ESRDGT schema, using the same oracle set (7 canonical IOI name-mover heads). BM25 recall@30 falls below the random-partition mean, confirming 56 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability Comprehensibility      

> Faithfulness
> Correctness
> Usefulness
> Specificity
> Trustworthiness
> Coherence
> Quality Dimension
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Agreement Percentage
> 33.8%
> 30.3% 32.1% 33.8% 32.4%
> 29.2%
> 32.9%
> 81.3%
> 75.7%
> 79.0% 78.1% 79.6%
> 76.0%
> 79.2%

Pairwise Rater Agreement by Quality Dimension 

> Exact Agreement
> Within ±1 Agreement

Figure 31. VAE system pairwise agreement rates by quality dimension. While exact agreement averages 32.1%, within-1 agreement exceeds 75% for all metrics. 

Table 38. LLM-as-judge evaluation for VAE system. Both LLM judges rate higher than humans, with Claude-Opus showing optimism bias of +0.59 points overall. 

Metric Human Claude GPT-5.1 ∆Claude ∆GPT 

Comprehensibility 4.01 4.46 4.77 +0.45 +0.76 Faithfulness 4.03 4.74 3.94 +0.71 −0.09 Correctness 4.05 4.57 3.86 +0.52 −0.19 Usefulness 3.82 4.31 3.94 +0.49 +0.12 Specificity 4.14 4.60 4.40 +0.46 +0.26 Trustworthiness 3.90 4.60 3.89 +0.70 −0.01 Coherence 4.16 4.91 4.94 +0.75 +0.78 

Overall 4.01 4.60 4.25 +0.59 +0.24 

that keyword-based retrieval provides no signal on functional-concept queries where surface form is uninformative. The optimism bias is consistent with documented LLM judge tendencies toward fluent, well-structured responses (Zheng et al., 2023). Importantly, the relative ordering of metrics is preserved: both humans and LLM judges rate Comprehensibility and Coherence highest, while Usefulness and Trustworthiness receive lower (but still positive) ratings. Figure 36 and Figure 37 present heatmap visualizations comparing all evaluator groups across metrics. Figure 38 directly compares human average scores with both LLM judges for the CNN system. Figure 39 and Figure 40 show overall score comparisons across all evaluator types. 

L.1. Key Findings Expertise Effect: Experts consistently rate 0.4–0.6 points lower than beginners across both systems, with largest gaps in Trustworthiness and Usefulness. This reflects appropriate skepticism about AI-generated explanations from knowledgeable users. 

LLM Optimism Bias: Both LLM judges exhibit systematic optimism, with Claude-Opus showing larger bias (+0.5–0.6 points) than GPT-5.1 (+0.2–0.3 points). GPT-5.1 occasionally rates below human averages for Faithfulness and Correctness. 57 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability E1 E2 E3 E4 E5 E6 E7 E8 E9                                     

> Evaluator
> E1
> E2
> E3
> E4
> E5
> E6
> E7
> E8
> E9
> Evaluator
> 1.00
> 0.86 1.00
> 0.81 0.86 1.00
> 0.94 0.84 0.81 1.00
> 0.79 0.80 0.78 0.75 1.00
> 0.95 0.90 0.84 0.94 0.77 1.00
> 0.89 0.83 0.79 0.84 0.81 0.85 1.00
> 0.90 0.89 0.81 0.88 0.82 0.86 0.87 1.00
> 0.66 0.45 0.54 0.67 0.44 0.68 0.51 0.54 1.00

Pairwise Rater Agreement Matrix 

(Within ±1 Point) 

> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> 1.0
> Within-1 Agreement Rate

Figure 32. VAE system pairwise rater agreement matrix (within ±1 point). E1–E9 represent anonymized evaluators. 

Metric Ordering Preservation: Despite absolute score differences, relative metric rankings remain consistent across evaluator types. Coherence and Comprehensibility receive highest ratings; Usefulness and Trustworthiness receive lowest. 

Cross-Architecture Consistency: Both VAE and CNN systems show similar evaluation patterns, supporting the framework’s architecture-agnostic design. 

## M. Automatic Evaluation Details 

Table 40 presents comprehensive automatic evaluation results across both architectures, LLM backends, and retrieval depths 

k ∈ { 5, 10 , 20 }.Key observations: • The CNN system achieves higher retrieval precision than VAE (96.8% vs. 89.6% at k = 5 ) due to the discrete nature of filter–class associations compared to continuous VAE dimensions. • Precision naturally decreases as k increases, while recall remains perfect (100%) because gold sets are small (1–5 units) and consistently captured within the top-k results. • Qwen3-8B achieves the highest generation quality (Gen-F1 up to 50.8%) and attribution scores (up to 70.1%), suggesting stronger adherence to retrieved evidence. 58 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability ICC(2,1) ICC(2,k) Krippendorff Fleiss                      

> IRR Metric
> comprehensibility
> faithfulness
> correctness
> usefulness
> specificity
> trustworthiness
> coherence
> Quality Dimension
> 0.030 0.220 -0.035 -0.004
> 0.056 0.348 -0.032 -0.024
> 0.070 0.406 0.002 -0.004
> 0.094 0.483 0.035 0.004
> 0.045 0.299 -0.012 -0.014
> 0.082 0.446 -0.003 -0.010
> 0.039 0.266 -0.016 -0.011

Inter-Rater Reliability Metrics by Quality Dimension 

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Reliability Coefficient

Figure 33. CNN system inter-rater reliability heatmap. Pattern mirrors VAE results, with low traditional metrics reflecting systematic expertise effects. 

Table 39. LLM-as-judge evaluation for CNN system. Claude-Opus maintains consistent optimism bias (+0.47 points); GPT-5.1 shows similar pattern with +0.22 points overall. 

Metric Human Claude GPT-5.1 ∆Claude ∆GPT 

Comprehensibility 4.07 4.51 4.69 +0.44 +0.62 Faithfulness 4.06 4.68 4.03 +0.62 −0.03 Correctness 4.05 4.49 3.91 +0.44 −0.14 Usefulness 3.92 4.37 4.11 +0.45 +0.19 Specificity 4.13 4.54 4.31 +0.41 +0.18 Trustworthiness 3.97 4.57 3.94 +0.60 −0.03 Coherence 4.13 4.49 4.89 +0.36 +0.76 

Overall 4.05 4.52 4.27 +0.47 +0.22 

• Claude-Opus demonstrates consistently superior factual accuracy (99.2–99.6%) but lower attribution, indicating a more conservative generation style that prioritizes correctness. • We hypothesize that Qwen’s stronger generation performance may stem from its text-only design explicitly optimized for natural language tasking, whereas multimodal-capable LLMs such as Claude and GPT distribute representational capacity across multiple modalities, potentially reducing specialization for structured text-based retrieval and generation. • Despite these differences, all configurations maintain high factual accuracy ( > 94% ), suggesting that grounding quality may matter more than model scale when retrieval provides correct and structured context. 

## N. Full Ablation Results 

Table 41 presents comprehensive ablation results across 14 configurations. 

Configuration descriptions. 

• Full System (Conversational) : Complete MANIFESTATION with all components including conversation state management. 59 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability Comprehensibility       

> Faithfulness
> Correctness
> Usefulness
> Specificity
> Trustworthiness
> Coherence
> Quality Dimension
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Agreement Percentage
> 31.0% 33.5% 34.4%
> 30.0% 32.5% 31.1% 31.9%
> 72.6%
> 80.3% 78.0%
> 72.3%
> 78.9%
> 72.5%
> 76.6%
> Pairwise Rater Agreement by Quality Dimension
> Exact Agreement
> Within ±1 Agreement

Figure 34. CNN system pairwise agreement rates by quality dimension. Within-1 agreement exceeds 72% for all metrics. 

• Manifestation (Base) : Core system without conversational layer. • No Reranking : Disables similarity threshold filtering; accepts all retrieved documents regardless of similarity score (threshold set to 0.0). • No Over-retrieval : Retrieves exactly k documents instead of 5k candidates with subsequent filtering (search multiplier set to 1). • No Exact Match Boosting : Disables the 1.5 × similarity boost for exact-match documents; exact matches still prioritized by flag but scores are not inflated. • Dims Index Only : Uses only the dimension/filter index, excluding Q&A and interaction indices. • No Query Reformulation : Disables context-aware query reformulation; pronouns and references are not resolved using conversation history. • No Exact Match : Disables entity-aware exact matching; dimension/filter identifiers are extracted for statistics only, not used for retrieval prioritization. • Semantic Search Only : Pure embedding-based retrieval without exact matching, boosting, or threshold filtering. • Exact Match Only : Retrieves only explicitly referenced entities via metadata lookup; no semantic expansion for conceptual queries. • Unstructured Text : Same statistical content serialized as free-form prose without (E, S, R, D, G ) structure or identifier normalization. • Q&A Index Only : Uses only the pre-computed question-answer pair index. • Interactions Index Only : Uses only the pairwise interaction/relationship index. • BM25 Hybrid : Combines BM25 sparse retrieval (term-frequency-based) with dense semantic embeddings, merging results by combined score. • ID Normalized (Semantic) : Prepends normalized identifier tokens (e.g., DIM 063 , CONV2 F23 ) to document text before embedding, then performs semantic search. 60 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability E1 E2 E3 E4 E5 E6 E7 E8 E9                                     

> Evaluator
> E1
> E2
> E3
> E4
> E5
> E6
> E7
> E8
> E9
> Evaluator
> 1.00
> 0.87 1.00
> 0.84 0.87 1.00
> 0.84 0.91 0.96 1.00
> 0.88 0.92 0.89 0.93 1.00
> 0.84 0.78 0.72 0.75 0.76 1.00
> 0.84 0.83 0.66 0.70 0.79 0.83 1.00
> 0.81 0.86 0.95 0.96 0.89 0.69 0.63 1.00
> 0.61 0.61 0.32 0.40 0.53 0.60 0.75 0.25 1.00

Pairwise Rater Agreement Matrix 

(Within ±1 Point) 

> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> 1.0
> Within-1 Agreement Rate

Figure 35. CNN system pairwise rater agreement matrix (within ±1 point). E1–E9 represent anonymized evaluators. 

Critical failures (bottom block) are configurations where removing a component causes dramatic performance collapse. 

Per-Query-Type Breakdown. Entity queries (e.g., “What does dimension 47 encode?”) achieve 95.0% (VAE) and 100.0% (CNN) precision with exact matching, but only 5.0% and 10.0% with semantic search alone. Concept queries show the opposite: semantic search achieves 78.0% (VAE) and 86.7% (CNN), while exact matching drops to 20.0% and 33.3%. This demonstrates why hybrid retrieval is necessary—neither strategy alone handles both query types. 61 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability 

Figure 36. VAE system evaluation heatmap across all evaluator groups. Darker green indicates higher scores. Claude-Opus consistently rates highest; experts rate most critically. Comprehensibility                                     

> Faithfulness
> Correctness
> Usefulness
> Specificity
> Trustworthiness
> Coherence
> Beginner
> Intermediate
> Expert
> Human Avg
> Claude-Opus
> GPT-5.1
> 4.37 4.33 4.55 4.20 4.51 4.43 4.42
> 4.03 4.14 4.12 4.00 3.74 4.07 3.90
> 3.59 3.90 3.81 3.57 4.01 3.60 3.82
> 4.00 4.12 4.16 3.92 4.08 4.03 4.05
> 4.51 4.68 4.49 4.37 4.54 4.57 4.49
> 4.69 4.03 3.91 4.11 4.31 3.94 4.89

Evaluation Scores Heatmap 

> 2.5
> 3.0
> 3.5
> 4.0
> 4.5
> 5.0
> Score

Figure 37. CNN system evaluation heatmap across all evaluator groups. Pattern mirrors VAE results with LLM judges showing systematic optimism bias. 

62 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability Comprehensibility 

> Faithfulness
> Correctness
> Usefulness
> Specificity
> Trustworthiness
> Coherence
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> Average Score (1-5)

Human vs LLM-as-Judge Evaluation 

> Human Avg
> Claude-Opus
> GPT-5.1

Figure 38. Human vs LLM-as-Judge comparison for CNN system. Human averages (blue) are consistently lower than Claude-Opus (purple) and GPT-5.1 (green) across most metrics. 0 1 2 3 4 5

Overall Average Score 

GPT-5.1 

Claude-Opus 

Human Avg 

Expert 

Intermediate 

Beginner 

4.25 

4.60 

4.02 

3.76 

4.11 

4.17 

Overall Scores Comparison 

Figure 39. Overall scores comparison for VAE system. Claude-Opus achieves highest overall (4.60), followed by GPT-5.1 (4.25), beginners (4.17), intermediates (4.11), human average (4.02), and experts (3.76). 

63 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability 0 1 2 3 4 5

> Overall Average Score
> GPT-5.1
> Claude-Opus
> Human Avg
> Expert
> Intermediate
> Beginner
> 4.27
> 4.52
> 4.05
> 3.75
> 4.00
> 4.40

Overall Scores Comparison 

Figure 40. Overall scores comparison for CNN system. Claude-Opus achieves highest overall (4.52), followed by beginners (4.40), GPT-5.1 (4.27), intermediates (4.00), human average (4.05), and experts (3.75). 

Table 40. Comprehensive automatic evaluation results. Bold: best per architecture-k combination. All systems achieve high retrieval recall and faithfulness, with Qwen showing strongest generation quality across both architectures. 

Retrieval Generation Semantic (BERT) Faithfulness Arch LLM k Prec Rec F1 NDCG Gen-F1 BLEU R-1 P R F1 Attr F-Acc VAE Qwen 5 89.6 100 94.5 100.0 47.1 14.1 51.3 83.5 87.1 85.3 64.5 97.9 10 56.2 100 72.0 98.8 45.9 13.4 50.0 83.1 85.7 84.4 59.1 98.0 20 46.8 100 63.8 96.4 38.3 9.2 41.8 82.9 84.3 83.6 61.1 98.4 Claude 5 89.6 100 94.5 100.0 43.8 12.0 47.8 82.1 86.1 84.1 47.1 99.2 

10 56.2 100 72.0 98.8 42.4 11.0 46.8 81.8 84.8 83.3 50.8 99.3 

20 46.8 100 63.8 96.4 35.7 6.0 39.9 82.0 83.8 82.9 54.0 99.6 

GPT 5 89.6 100 94.5 100.0 32.7 7.7 34.6 78.0 82.4 80.2 37.8 95.3 10 56.2 100 72.0 98.8 35.9 8.4 38.3 81.1 84.4 82.7 43.1 98.6 20 46.8 100 63.8 96.4 33.2 6.0 35.7 80.8 83.1 81.9 42.8 99.3 CNN Qwen 5 96.8 100 98.4 100.0 50.8 13.8 54.2 86.8 87.5 87.2 66.7 96.8 10 48.4 100 65.2 100.0 49.6 13.9 53.1 87.1 87.5 87.3 70.1 97.1 20 24.2 100 39.0 100.0 41.2 11.9 49.5 87.1 86.7 86.9 67.2 94.4 Claude 5 96.8 100 98.4 100.0 46.3 12.3 51.1 82.4 87.0 86.4 64.3 99.3 

10 48.4 100 65.2 100.0 44.6 12.2 50.0 84.7 85.4 84.7 66.8 99.5 

20 24.2 100 39.0 100.0 39.3 7.2 43.5 85.4 84.3 84.2 66.4 99.6 

GPT 5 96.8 100 98.4 100.0 35.5 9.5 38.0 80.0 81.5 82.4 61.6 96.5 10 48.4 100 65.2 100.0 37.8 7.9 41.3 83.6 83.3 83.9 63.7 97.9 20 24.2 100 39.0 100.0 36.2 6.8 38.7 81.3 82.7 83.1 62.3 99.0 

64 Representation as a Bottleneck for Mechanistic Interpretability 

Table 41. Comprehensive evaluation at k=5 . Top block: MANIFESTATION ablations (14 configurations for VAE; 7 applicable configurations for CNN — the CNN pipeline is non-conversational and uses a single hybrid retriever, making VAE-specific conversational ablations inapplicable). Bottom block: traditional retrieval baselines. Cells marked “–” denote inapplicable configurations; see text for explanation of the Manifestation (Base) CNN entry. 

VAE System CNN System Configuration Prec F-Acc ∆Prec ∆F-Acc Prec F-Acc ∆Prec ∆F-Acc Full System (Conversational) 89.6 97.9 96.8 96.8 Manifestation (Base) 94.0 81.5 +4 .4 −16 .4 96.8 † 96.8 † 0.0 0.0 No Reranking 94.0 78.6 +4.4 −19.3 96.8 91.8 0.0 −5.0 No Over-retrieval 94.0 74.6 +4.4 −23.3 96.8 95.0 0.0 −1.8 No Context Boosting 94.0 74.7 +4.4 −23.2 – – – –Similarity Off 94.0 76.5 +4.4 −21.4 – – – –Dims Index Only 94.0 78.4 +4.4 −19.5 – – – –No Query Reformulation 94.0 20.3 +4.4 −77.6 – – – –

Critical failures (ablation): 

No Exact Match 4.8 21.8 −84.8 −76.1 26.0 59.1 −70.8 −37.7 Semantic Search Only 4.8 20.7 −84.8 −77.2 26.0 60.5 −70.8 −36.3 Exact Match Only 62.4 78.3 −27.2 −19.6 71.2 82.1 −25.6 −14.7 Unstructured Text 3.7 0.7 −85.9 −97.2 2.8 41.9 −94.0 −54.9 Q&A Index Only 0.0 0.0 −89.6 −97.9 – – – –Interactions Index Only 0.0 0.0 −89.6 −97.9 – – – –

Traditional retrieval baselines: 

BM25 Hybrid 18.0 45.5 −71.6 −52.4 20.4 48.5 −76.4 −48.3 ID Normalized (Semantic) 3.2 19.9 −86.4 −78.0 17.2 73.2 −79.6 −23.6 

Table 42. GPT-2 oracle recall@ k for BM25 (lexical) vs baselines. Oracle set: 7 canonical IOI L7–9 name-mover heads. BM25 recall@30 

= 0 .143 falls below random ( 0.304 ), confirming surface-form retrieval carries no signal on functional-concept queries. Baseline recall@7 recall@15 recall@30 

Framework S+R 0.089 0.232 0.411 

Full-MU embed 0.071 0.179 0.339 Random (mean) 0.018 0.143 0.304 BM25 (lexical) 0.000 0.071 0.143 

65