Title: NObSP: Functional Decomposition of Neural Networks via Oblique Subspace Projections

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.17825v1

Published Time: Thu, 17 Sep 2026 00:22:17 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
1

# NObSP: Functional Decomposition of Neural Networks via Oblique Subspace Projections 

Alexander Caicedo, V´ ıctor De La Hoz, and Santiago Alf ´ erez 

Abstract —Understanding how deep neural networks make decisions remains a fundamental challenge. We present NObSP (Nonlinear Oblique Subspace Projections), a framework that decomposes predictions into explicit per feature contribution functions and an interaction residual. NObSP exploits the linear final layer of a trained network and uses oblique projections in sample space to reduce double counting when learned feature subspaces overlap, thereby supporting both local explanations and global functional analysis. We establish connections to functional ANOVA and the Kolmogorov-Arnold representation theorem and derive an efficient partial regression algorithm for out of sample evaluation. For convolutional networks, NObSP-CAM produces class activation maps without backward passes after a one time calibration. Experiments on tabular and vision benchmarks show faithfulness comparable to established attribution methods. On a synthetic benchmark with known component functions, NObSP obtains a Function Reproduction Score of 0.989, compared with 0.966 for KernelSHAP and 0.922 for Integrated Gradients. On TinyImageNet, contribution vector embeddings improve mean nearest neighbor class purity from 0.654 for raw activations to 0.713 and reduce mean neighbor distance by more than half. These results indicate that NObSP complements scalar attribution methods by recovering functional contribution profiles with separable positive and negative evidence. 

Index Terms —Neural network interpretability, explainable AI, oblique subspace projections, functional decomposition, class activation maps, ANOVA decomposition, feature attribution. 

This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which this version may no longer be accessible. 

✦

1 INTRODUCTION 

# THE deployment of deep neural networks in high risk domains including medical diagnosis, autonomous sys-tems, financial decisions, and legal reasoning, has created an urgent need for interpretability methods that explain how these models arrive at their predictions [1], [2]. Regulatory frameworks such as the European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation increasingly require explanations for automated decisions [3]. Yet neural networks remain largely opaque; while we can observe their inputs and outputs, the internal computations that transform one to the other are difficult to interpret. Existing interpretability methods face fundamental limitations. Attribution methods such as SHAP [5] and LIME [4] provide scalar importance scores, but knowing that feature xk contributes a specific amount to the prediction reveals far less than knowing its functional re-lationship gk(xk). Functional decomposition methods such as Partial Dependence Plots (PDP) [13] and Accumulated Local Effects (ALE) [15] recover functional forms but strug-gle with correlated features, accumulate numerical errors, and lack efficient out-of-sample extension, PDP requires re-averaging over training samples for each new query while 

• A. Caicedo is with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Pontificia Universidad Javeriana, Bogot´ a, Colombia. E-mail: acaicedod@javeriana.edu.co 

• V. De La Hoz is with Pontificia Universidad Javeriana, Bogot´ a, Colombia. 

• S. Alf´ erez is with the Department of Mathematics, Universitat Polit` ecnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain. E-mail: santiago.alferez@upc.edu 

• This work is part of a research project funded by the Ministry of Science and Innovation of Spain, with reference PID2023-146261OB-I00. 

ALE produces binned approximations that do not naturally extrapolate beyond the observed feature range. For convo-lutional networks, Class Activation Mapping methods [9], [12] highlight spatial regions but provide no insight into the functional relationship between pixel values and pre-dictions. Most critically, existing methods are designed for either local or global interpretation, requiring practitioners to employ multiple techniques for comprehensive under-standing. This paper presents NObSP (Nonlinear Oblique Sub-space Projections), a mathematically principled framework that addresses these limitations by decomposing neural net-work predictions into interpretable functional components. The main idea behind this decomposition is architectural; in a trained neural network, all nonlinearity resides in how inputs transform to the penultimate layer representation 

z = fNN →L−1(x), while the final layer acting on this latent variable, ˆy = w⊤z + b, is linear. This means the prediction vector ˆy = Zw + b1 is linear in the representations, so oblique projection decomposition in sample space RN is tractable. The subspaces Vk traced out by each isolated input feature encode the learned nonlinear transformations, passing an input where only feature k is active through the network reveals exactly how the network processes that feature. NObSP decomposes predictions into additive functional components: 

ˆy(x) = 

dX

k=1 

gk(xk) + Gint (x) + b, (1) arXiv:2609.17825v1 [cs.LG] 15 Sep 2026 2

where gk(xk) represents the nonlinear contribution of fea-ture k, and Gint captures interaction effects. The critical challenge is that learned subspaces are generally not or-thogonal, the network may use overlapping representations for different features, a phenomenon known as superposi-tion [22]. Classical ANOVA decomposition requires orthog-onality, but NObSP resolves this through oblique subspace projections [23], which project onto a target subspace along, not perpendicular to, a reference subspace. This isolates the unique contribution of each feature while properly account-ing for representational overlap. The relationship between NObSP and existing methods indicates its position in the interpretability landscape. Both NObSP and SHAP connect to functional ANOVA decompo-sition. SHAP distributes interaction effects among features via Shapley values, yielding scalars that answer how much does feature k contribute? NObSP instead keeps functional terms separate, yielding complete functions that answer how does feature k contribute across its range? These perspectives are complementary. Compared to Partial Dependence Plots, NObSP avoids extrapolation into unlikely feature combina-tions; compared to Accumulated Local Effects, it does not rely on derivative estimation and accumulation. Unlike gra-dient based CAM methods that operate per sample, NObSP provides a unified framework for both local explanations, individual predictions, and global analysis, feature effects across the dataset. Beyond attribution, NObSP contribution vectors g(x) = [g1(x1), . . . , g d(xd)] ⊤ induce a geometrically meaningful embedding space. Preliminary experiments show that this embedding improves mean class purity in nearest neighbor retrieval (0.71 vs 0.65 for raw activations on TinyImageNet, with median purity 1.0), suggesting that NObSP captures the classifier’s decision geometry rather than merely the fea-ture space. This property enables applications in uncertainty quantification and similarity based explanation retrieval. This paper makes the following contributions: 1) Theoretical Framework : We establish formal con-nections between NObSP, the Kolmogorov-Arnold representation theorem, and functional ANOVA de-composition, stated under explicit assumptions. 2) Efficient Algorithm : We introduce a partial regres-sion formulation that reduces computational com-plexity from O(N 2) to O(dz ) for out-of-sample eval-uation, where dz is the penultimate layer dimension, enabling practical application to large-scale models. 3) NObSP-CAM : We extend NObSP to convolutional neural networks, producing class activation maps grounded in the oblique projection framework. 4) Embedding Geometry Analysis : We provide pre-liminary evidence that NObSP contribution vec-tors form a useful retrieval embedding, improving neighborhood class purity by 6 percentage points over raw activations and reducing mean neighbor distance by more than half on TinyImageNet, with-out requiring ground truth labels at inference. 5) Comprehensive Evaluation : We benchmark NObSP on both tabular and vision tasks, showing faith-fulness comparable to established attribution meth-ods while adding a complementary form of in-TABLE 1: Comparison of interpretability methods. NObSP provides functional forms with unified local and global interpretation while accounting for overlap between learned feature subspaces.                                         

> Method Output Local Global Functional Correlation LIME Scalar ✓–––SHAP Scalar ✓Agg. –✓
> IG Scalar ✓–––PDP Curve –✓✓–ALE Curve –✓✓✓
> GradCAM Heatmap ✓––N/A
> NObSP Function ✓✓✓✓

terpretability unavailable from scalar attributions, explicit per feature contribution functions. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related work. Section 3 presents the the-oretical foundations. Section 4 describes the NObSP frame-work and its extension to convolutional neural networks, in-cluding the embedding geometry analysis in Subsection 4.5. Section 5 details experimental setup. Section 6 presents re-sults. Section 7 discusses findings and limitations. Section 8 concludes. 

2 RELATED WORK 

This section reviews the interpretability landscape, position-ing NObSP relative to existing approaches. Table 1 summa-rizes the key differences across methods. 

2.1 Gradient Based Attribution Methods 

Gradient based methods leverage the differentiability of neural networks to assign importance scores to input fea-tures. Saliency Maps [28] compute the gradient of the output with respect to the input, measuring local sensitivity but suffering from gradient saturation and providing only first-order information. Integrated Gradients [6] addresses some limitations by accumulating gradients along a path from a baseline to the input, satisfying desirable axioms includ-ing completeness and sensitivity. DeepLIFT [7] propagates activation differences through the network with improved computational efficiency. However, all these methods share baseline dependency and provide scalar attributions rather than functional forms. For convolutional networks, Class Activation Mapping (CAM) [8] exploits global average pooling to produce spatial heatmaps. GradCAM [9] generalizes this to arbitrary archi-tectures by using gradients to compute channel importance weights. Subsequent variants include GradCAM++ [10], which uses weighted combinations of positive gradients, Score-CAM [11], which perturbs inputs with upsampled activation maps, and Eigen-CAM [12], which uses principal component analysis on feature maps. All gradient based methods share a fundamental limitation, they provide point attributions or spatial heatmaps but not the functional rela-tionship gk(xk) between input values and predictions. 3

2.2 Perturbation Based Attribution Methods 

Perturbation based methods measure feature importance by observing prediction changes when inputs are modi-fied. LIME [4] fits a sparse linear model around a specific input, weighting samples by proximity and encouraging sparsity. While model agnostic, LIME provides only local linear approximations that may poorly represent nonlinear behaviour. SHAP [5] computes Shapley values from cooperative game theory, satisfying desirable properties including local accuracy, missingness, and consistency. The relationship be-tween SHAP and NObSP merits careful analysis. Both con-nect to functional ANOVA decomposition but in different ways. SHAP distributes interaction effects among participat-ing features according to Shapley values, producing a single scalar per feature that aggregates main effects and allocated interactions. NObSP instead keeps these terms separate, 

gk(xk) captures the main effect as a function, while inter-action terms remain distinct. Thus, SHAP answers “how much does feature k contribute?” while NObSP answers “how does feature k contribute as a function of its value?” 

2.3 Functional Decomposition Methods 

Functional decomposition methods aim to recover the rela-tionship between individual features and predictions, mov-ing beyond scalar attributions. Partial Dependence Plots (PDP) [13] estimate the marginal effect of feature k by averaging predictions over the empirical distribution of other features. While intuitive, PDP has critical limitations. When features are correlated, averaging over the marginal distribution includes combina-tions that may never occur in the data, potentially producing misleading extrapolations. Additionally, PDP lacks efficient out-of-sample extension, evaluating a new point requires re-averaging over all training samples, demanding O(N )

model evaluations per query. Individual Conditional Expectation (ICE) plots [14] ad-dress heterogeneity by displaying curves for individual observations rather than averaging. However, ICE inherits the extrapolation problem of PDP and can produce cluttered visualizations. Accumulated Local Effects (ALE) [15] addresses the cor-relation problem by accumulating local derivatives using conditional expectations. By avoiding extrapolation into un-likely feature combinations, ALE handles correlated features more appropriately than PDP. However, the accumulation of finite differences introduces numerical errors, the method exhibits sensitivity near points with discontinuous deriva-tives, and it produces binned approximations that do not naturally extrapolate beyond the observed feature range. Functional ANOVA decomposition [21] provides the theoretical foundation for these approaches. When features are correlated, the standard definition becomes problematic: conditional expectations conflate the effect of one feature with effects of correlated features. NObSP offers advan-tages over these functional methods: unlike PDP, it does not average over marginal distributions and thus avoids extrapolation; unlike ALE, it does not rely on derivative estimation and accumulation; and unlike standard ANOVA implementations, it uses oblique rather than orthogonal projections to reduce double counting when learned feature subspaces overlap. Furthermore, NObSP precomputes coef-ficient vectors during calibration, enabling efficient O(dz )

out-of-sample evaluation with a single forward pass. 

2.4 Interpretable by Design Models 

An alternative to post-hoc interpretation is to constrain model architecture for inherent interpretability. Generalized Additive Models (GAMs) [39] restrict the learned function to additive form, guaranteeing interpretability but sacrific-ing flexibility to model interactions. Neural Additive Mod-els (NAMs) [16] implement GAMs with neural networks, learning each univariate function as a separate subnetwork, and GA 2M models [17] extend additive models with se-lected pairwise interactions. The fundamental trade-off is between interpretability and flexibility. Interpretable by design models constrain what can be learned, potentially sacrificing predictive per-formance. NObSP avoids this trade-off by extracting inter-pretable decompositions from unconstrained networks that have already learned arbitrary functions. 

2.5 Subspace and Projection Methods 

The mathematical foundation of NObSP lies in subspace projection theory from signal processing. Oblique projec-tions were introduced by Behrens and Scharf [23] for sig-nal separation when signal and interference subspaces are non-orthogonal. Given a target subspace Vk and reference subspace V(k) with Vk ∩ V (k) = {0}, the oblique projector uniquely decomposes any vector into components lying in each subspace. Unlike orthogonal projection, which mini-mizes distance to the subspace, oblique projection moves parallel to the reference subspace until reaching the target. Caicedo et al. [24] extended oblique projections to non-linear function decomposition in Least Squares Support Vector Machines. The present work extends this framework to deep neural networks, where the penultimate layer rep-resentation plays the role of the feature map, and introduces computational improvements that reduce complexity from 

O(N 2) to O(dz ).

2.6 Evaluation Methods 

Standardized evaluation of attribution methods remains challenging. The Quantus framework [27] provides a com-prehensive toolkit implementing multiple metrics across categories including faithfulness, robustness, and complex-ity. Faithfulness Correlation measures the correlation be-tween feature attribution importance and the actual change in model prediction when features are progressively re-moved. Higher values indicate that the method correctly identifies which features matter most for the prediction. Sparseness measures how concentrated the attributions are, with higher values indicating more focused explanations that highlight specific regions rather than diffusing attention across the input. We employ Faithfulness Correlation for tabular attributions and Sparseness in both domains; for class activation maps we adopt a region level deletion protocol (Section 5.2), because pixel level perturbation is 4

mismatched to the spatial granularity of CAMs. No single evaluation metric is neutral across attribution families, so we report several and state each metric’s bias where rele-vant. 

3 THEORETICAL FOUNDATIONS 

This section establishes the mathematical foundations of NObSP, connecting oblique subspace projections to func-tional ANOVA decomposition and neural network interpre-tation. 

3.1 Oblique Subspace Projections 

Oblique projections generalize orthogonal projections to handle non-orthogonal subspaces. Rather than projecting perpendicular to the target subspace, oblique projection moves parallel to a reference subspace until reaching the target, isolating the component that lies in the target and 

cannot be explained by the reference. 

Definition 3.1 (Oblique Projector) . Let V = Vk ⊕ V (k) be a direct sum decomposition of vector space V, where Vk is the target subspace and V(k) is the reference subspace. The oblique projector onto Vk along V(k) is the linear operator Pk/ (k) satisfying: 

1) Pk/ (k)v ∈ V k for all v ∈ V (range condition), 

2) Pk/ (k)v = v for all v ∈ V k (identity on target), 

3) Pk/ (k)v = 0 for all v ∈ V (k) (null on reference). 

The third condition distinguishes oblique from orthog-onal projection: vectors in the reference subspace project to zero, even if they have nonzero orthogonal projection onto the target. This ensures that shared components between subspaces are not double counted. Given matrices Ak and A(k) whose columns span Vk

and V(k) respectively, the oblique projector admits the closed form expression 

Pk/ (k) = Ak



ATk Q(k)Ak

†

ATk Q(k), (2) where † denotes the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse and 

Q(k) = I − A(k)



AT

> (k)

A(k)

†

AT 

> (k)

(3) is the orthogonal projector onto the null space of V(k).

3.2 Connection to Functional ANOVA 

The Hoeffding or Functional ANOVA decomposition [20], [21] provides that any square-integrable function f : Rd →

R of independent random variables admits a unique decom-position: 

f (x) = f0 +

> d

X

> k=1

fk(xk) + X

> k<m

fkm (xk, x m) + . . . + f1,...,d (x),

(4) where components satisfy orthogonality constraints ensur-ing that main effects capture only variance due to individual variables. The connection to oblique projections emerges when we represent functions by their evaluations over asample. Given N observations, the vector y =[f (x(1) ), . . . , f (x(N ))] T represents function evaluations in 

RN . The subspace Vk represents functions depending only on xk, while V(k) represents functions of all variables ex-cept xk. Classical ANOVA uses orthogonal projections, re-quiring orthogonality among functional components. When representation subspaces are non-orthogonal, as commonly occurs in neural networks where learned representations exhibit overlap, oblique projections provide correct attribu-tion. 

Theorem 3.1 (NObSP as Generalized ANOVA) . Let y ∈ RN

be function evaluations and {V k}dk=1 be subspaces representing single-variable functions. The oblique projection decomposition 

y =

> d

X

> k=1

Pk/ (k)y + r (5) 

provides an ANOV A-like decomposition that (i) reduces to classi-cal ANOV A when subspaces are orthogonal, (ii) correctly handles non-orthogonal subspaces via oblique projection, and (iii) provides unique attribution of main effects. Proof sketch. When subspaces are orthogonal, Q(k) acts as identity on Vk, and (2) reduces to the orthogonal projector. For non-orthogonal subspaces, Definition 3.1 ensures Pk/ (k)

extracts only the component uniquely attributable to Vk. The full proof appears in Supplementary Material A. 

3.3 Decomposition in Neural Networks 

Consider a neural network f : Rd → Rc with L layers. The main idea is that all nonlinearity resides in the mapping to the penultimate layer z = fN N →L−1(x) ∈ Rdz , while the final layer is linear: 

ˆyj = wTj z + bj , (6) where wj are the weights for output j and bj is the bias term. This linearity enables a projection based decomposi-tion of the prediction vector in sample space RN , with per sample evaluation through the penultimate representation. For each input feature k, we construct subspaces by passing isolated inputs through the network. Define Xk as the input matrix with only feature k active, others set to zero or a baseline value, and X(k) with all features except k

active. The corresponding penultimate representations are: 

Zk = fN N →L−1(Xk), (7) 

Z(k) = fN N →L−1(X(k)). (8) Each matrix Zk ∈ RN ×dz embeds the feature k rep-resentations into sample space. Its column space Vk =

col (˜Zk) ⊆ RN is the subspace of N -dimensional vectors rep-resentable as linear combinations of the penultimate layer activations from isolated feature k inputs. Analogously, 

V(k) = col (˜Z(k)) ⊆ RN .

Theorem 3.2 (Prediction Decomposition) . For a neural net-work with linear final layer ˆyj = wTj z + bj , the centered prediction vector decomposes as 

˜yj = ˆ yj − bj =

> d

X

> k=1

Pk/ (k) ˜yj + rj =

> d

X

> k=1

gk,j + rj , (9) 5

where each gk,j = Pk/ (k) ˜Z w j ∈ RN is the contribution vector of feature k to output j. Through the partial regression equivalence (Theorem 4.1), 

gk,j = ˜Zk Ωk wj ,

Ωk =   ˜ZTk Q(k) ˜Zk

† ˜ZTk Q(k) ˜Z ∈ Rdz ×dz , (10) 

yielding per sample functional contributions that depend only on xk:

gk,j (x(i) 

> k

) = ˜ z(i)⊤ 

> k

Ωk wj . (11) 

Proof sketch. By linearity of the final layer, ˜yj = ˜Zw j .Applying the oblique projection decomposition from The-orem 3.1 to the centered predictions yields (9). By the partial regression equivalence, Pk/ (k) ˜yj = ˜Zk βk,j with 

βk,j = Ωk wj . The i-th entry gk,j (x(i) 

> k

) = ˜z(i)⊤ 

> k

Ωk wj

depends only on x(i) 

> k

because ˜z(i) 

> k

= fN N →L−1(x(i) 

> k

) − ¯zk

is computed from the isolated input. See Supplementary Material A for details. 

3.4 Uniqueness 

Theorem 3.3 (Uniqueness of Decomposition) . Given atrained network fN N , calibration data X, and baseline choice, assume Vk ∩V (k) = {0} for all k. Then the NObSP decomposition is unique. When the intersection is nontrivial, the regularized estimator of Algorithm 1 defines a unique solution of minimum norm, which we use in practice. Proof sketch. Uniqueness follows from three observations: (1) subspaces Vk ⊆ RN are uniquely determined by for-ward passes of isolated inputs through the fixed network; (2) oblique projectors are unique under the stated inter-section assumption; (3) contributions gk,j (xk) = ˜zTk βk,j 

follow uniquely from the unique projectors and fixed fi-nal layer weights, since βk,j = (˜ZTk Q(k) ˜Zk)† ˜ZTk Q(k) ˜yj

is uniquely determined. Different interpretability methods yield different attributions because they define “contribu-tion” differently, this reflects methodological choice, not non-uniqueness within NObSP. 

3.5 Connection to Kolmogorov-Arnold Representation 

The Kolmogorov-Arnold theorem [18], [19] establishes that any continuous multivariate function can be expressed as sums of univariate functions composed with addition. Neu-ral networks implement an analogous structure, each layer applies univariate activations to linear combinations. The penultimate representation z encapsulates these learned compositions. NObSP extracts this learned representation by tracing computational pathways activated by each fea-ture, with subspace Zk encoding the learned transformation of xk analogously to the inner functions in the Kolmogorov-Arnold representation. 

3.6 Baseline Choice 

Setting inactive features to zero is well justified when inputs are normalized to zero mean, zero represents the population average, analogous to baselines in SHAP and Integrated Gradients. The interpretation becomes “contribution of fea-ture k relative to its average value.” 

4 NO BSP F RAMEWORK 

This section presents the NObSP algorithm for neural net-works and its extension to convolutional architectures. Fig-ure 1 provides a visual overview of the complete pipeline. 

4.1 Problem Formulation 

Consider a trained neural network fN N : Rd → Rc mapping 

d-dimensional inputs to c outputs. For a dataset X ∈ RN ×d

with predictions ˆY ∈ RN ×c, the objective is to decompose predictions into interpretable functional components: 

ˆyj (x) = bj +

> d

X

> k=1

gk,j (xk) + X

> k<m

gkm,j (xk, x m) + . . . (12) where gk,j (xk) represents the functional contribution of feature k to output j.

4.2 Subspace Construction 

The construction of feature subspaces requires a baseline representing the absence of a feature. We assume inputs are normalized to zero mean and unit variance, a standard preprocessing step for neural networks. Under this nor-malization, setting inactive features to zero positions them at their population mean, providing a baseline with clear statistical interpretation. For each feature k, we construct the isolated input matrix 

Xk ∈ RN ×d where only the k-th column contains observed values and all other columns are zero. Similarly, the ref-erence input matrix X(k) contains all features except k.Passing these through the network to the penultimate layer yields representation matrices: 

Zk = fN N →L−1(Xk) ∈ RN ×dz , (13) 

Z(k) = fN N →L−1(X(k)) ∈ RN ×dz , (14) where dz denotes the penultimate layer dimension. After mean centering via ˜Zk = MZ k with centering matrix 

M = I − 1 

> N

11 T , the column spaces define the feature subspace Vk = col (˜Zk) ⊆ RN and reference subspace 

V(k) = col (˜Z(k)) ⊆ RN , respectively. 

4.3 Efficient Computation via Partial Regression 

Direct computation of the oblique projector Pk/ (k) requires 

O(N 2) storage and O(N 3) computation per feature, render-ing it impractical for large datasets. We introduce an equiv-alent formulation based on partial regression that reduces storage complexity to O(dz ).The main idea behind is that oblique projection can be reformulated as sequential partial regressions. Rather than explicitly constructing projection matrices, we compute coefficient vectors βk,j ∈ Rdz such that contributions are obtained as ˆyk,j = ˜Zkβk,j .

Theorem 4.1 (Equivalence of Partial Regression Formu-lation) . The contribution ˜Zkβk,j computed via Algorithm 1 coincides with the oblique projection of ˆyj onto Vk along V(k):

˜Zkβk,j = Pk/ (k) ˆyj . (15) 6

Input 

x

> [x1, . . . , x d]

Neural Network 

> fNN →L−1

Penultimate layer 

z ∈ Rdz

Subspace Construction      

> ZkZ(k)· · ·
> Isolated inputs:
> xk= [0 , . . . , x k, . . . , 0]

Oblique Projection        

> Pk/ (k)=Zk(Z⊤
> kQ(k)Zk)†Z⊤
> kQ(k)
> isolates unique contribution of feature k

Functional Contributions        

> g1(x1)g2(x2)
> · · ·
> ˆy=P
> kgk(xk) + b

ˆy

Prediction 

> z

Key Insight: All nonlinearity resides in x → z; final layer ˆy = w⊤z + b is linear    

> ⇒Decomposition in z-space is linear, solved via oblique projections onto learned subspaces Vk

Fig. 1: Overview of the NObSP framework. An input x passes through the neural network to produce penultimate layer activations z. Subspaces Zk are constructed by passing isolated inputs (where only feature k is active) through the network. Oblique projection onto Vk along V(k) isolates the unique contribution of each feature, yielding functional forms gk(xk)

that sum to the prediction. The linear final layer enables this decomposition to be solved exactly. 

Algorithm 1 Efficient Partial Regression Formulation 

Require: ˜Zk (target basis), ˜Z(k) (reference basis), ˆyj (pre-dictions), λ (regularization) 

Ensure: βk,j (coefficient vector)  

> 1:

A ←

 ˜ZT 

> (k)

˜Z(k) + λI

−1 ˜ZT 

> (k)
> 2:

ˆyres ← ˆyj − ˜Z(k)Aˆyj {Remove reference subspace from predictions } 

> 3:

˜Zres ← ˜Zk − ˜Z(k)A˜Zk {Remove reference subspace from target } 

> 4:

βk,j ←

 ˜ZTres ˜Zres + λI

−1 ˜ZTres ˆyres  

> 5:

return βk,j 

Proof sketch. The residuals from Steps 2–3 satisfy ˆyres =

Q(k) ˆyj and ˜Zres = Q(k) ˜Zk, where Q(k) is the orthogo-nal complement projector. Using the idempotence Q2(k) =

Q(k) and symmetry QT 

> (k)

= Q(k), we obtain βk,j =

 ˜ZTk Q(k) ˜Zk

† ˜ZTk Q(k) ˆyj . Substituting into the contribution expression yields the oblique projector form. Full details appear in the supplementary material. The regularization parameter λ > 0 provides numeri-cal stability when subspace bases are ill-conditioned, with equivalence holding exactly as λ → 0.This formulation offers substantial computational ad-vantages. Calibration requires solving least squares prob-lems of dimension dz ×dz , yielding complexity O(N d 2 

> z

+d3 

> z

)

per feature versus O(N 2dz + N 3) for direct projection. Since 

dz ≪ N in typical applications, this represents a substantial reduction. More importantly, the coefficient vectors enable efficient out-of-sample evaluation. For a new input x∗, the contribu-tion of feature k to output j is: 

gk,j (x∗

> k

) = z∗Tk βk,j , (16) where z∗ 

> k

= fN N →L−1(x∗

> k

) is the penultimate representa-tion of the isolated input. This requires only a single forward pass plus an inner product, yielding O(dz ) complexity per feature, no projection matrices need be stored, and no refer-ence to the calibration data is required at inference time. 

4.4 Extension to CNNs: NObSP-CAM 

For convolutional neural networks, NObSP is adapted to generate class activation maps by treating feature map chan-nels as variables to be decomposed. Consider a CNN with convolutional backbone produc-ing spatial feature maps F ∈ RC×H×W , followed by global average pooling z = GAP (F) ∈ RC and linear classifier 

ˆy = Wz + b. Treating each channel c as a feature yields: 

ˆyq = bq +

> C

X

> c=1

gc,q (zc), (17) where q indexes the output class. Unlike gradient based methods that operate per sam-ple, NObSP-CAM requires calibration across multiple sam-ples to estimate oblique projections. The procedure extracts pooled features and predictions from a calibration set, com-putes β coefficients via Algorithm 1, and caches them for inference. Calibration requirements depend on penultimate layer dimension; in our experiments, 1,000–5,000 samples provided stable estimates across architectures with 440– 1,280 dimensional representations. 7

For a test image with spatial feature maps F and target class q, the class activation map is: CAM q (h, w ) = 

> C

X

> c=1

Fc,h,w · max( gc,q (zc), 0) , (18) using positive coefficients only. This follows the convention established by GradCAM [9], which applies ReLU to retain only features with positive influence on the class score. The NObSP framework naturally produces both positive and negative coefficients, where negative values indicate channels providing evidence against the target class. While this decomposition offers potential interpretive value, the present work focuses exclusively on positive contributions for direct comparability with existing methods. Analysis of negative evidence maps remains an avenue for future investigation. Once calibrated, NObSP-CAM inference requires only a single forward pass to obtain spatial features, followed by a weighted sum with cached coefficients, comparable to GradCAM’s cost without requiring a backward pass. The framework generalizes beyond the standard GAP architecture. For CNNs employing more complex classifiers, such as one or more fully connected layers after the convolu-tional backbone, NObSP applies identically by extracting z

from the penultimate layer of the classifier head rather than directly from pooled features. The only requirement is that the final layer mapping z to outputs remains linear, which holds for virtually all classification architectures. Regarding calibration sample requirements, while the 

dz × dz matrix inversions in Algorithm 1 nominally suggest 

N ≥ dz samples, the actual requirement is determined by the effective rank of the feature subspaces Vk, not the ambient dimension dz . Caicedo et al. [24] observed that decomposition error converges once the number of samples exceeds the maximum rank of the subspace matrices; in their experiments this was 45 samples despite much higher ambient dimensionality. This phenomenon reflects the low intrinsic dimensionality of learned representations. Neural networks typically encode information on low-dimensional manifolds within the activation space. Consequently, regu-larization ( λ > 0) combined with the inherently low-rank structure of learned subspaces enables stable coefficient estimation with far fewer samples than dz . We employed calibration sets of 1,000–5,000 samples to ensure robustness across architectures, though substantially smaller sets may suffice when the effective subspace rank is low. 

4.5 Embedding Space and Similarity Retrieval 

Beyond functional decomposition, the NObSP framework induces a geometrically meaningful embedding space with applications for similarity based retrieval and uncertainty quantification. This subsection develops these connections. 

4.5.1 Contribution Vector Embedding 

For a given input x, NObSP decomposition produces a contribution vector: 

g(x) = [ g1(x1), g 2(x2), . . . , g d(xd)] T ∈ Rd, (19) encoding how each input feature contributes to the pre-diction. This vector defines an embedding where geometry reflects the functional structure of predictions rather than raw feature similarity. A key property derives from the continuity of contri-bution functions. For networks with continuous activations (sigmoid, tanh, GELU), the functions gk(xk) are smooth; for piecewise linear activations (ReLU), they are piecewise linear and continuous. In either case, the mapping x 7 → g(x)

preserves neighborhood structure. 

Proposition 4.1 (Continuity of NObSP Embedding) . Let 

fN N : Rd → R be a neural network with continuous activation functions and linear output layer. Then NObSP contribution functions gk : R → R are continuous for all k, and consequently the embedding g : Rd → Rd is continuous. 

The proof follows from observing that gk(xk) = ˜ z⊤ 

> k

Ωkw

is a composition of continuous mappings, the network forward pass on the isolated input, centering, and multi-plication by the fixed matrices Ωk and w. This continuity implies that NObSP embedding provides a representation space where distance reflects functional similarity in how predictions are formed. 

4.5.2 Similarity Based Explanation Retrieval 

NObSP embedding facilitates explanation through similar-ity. Given a test prediction, retrieve training samples whose contribution vectors are most similar. 

Definition 4.1 (NObSP Similarity) . For inputs x and x′ with contribution vectors g(x) and g(x′), NObSP similarity is: 

s(x, x′) = g(x)T g(x′)

∥g(x)∥ · ∥ g(x′)∥ . (20) In a deployment setting, the target class c used to com-pute contribution vectors is the model’s predicted class ˆy,requiring no ground-truth labels. This makes the embed-ding computable at inference time for any new input. For a test input x∗, retrieving the K nearest neighbors according to NObSP similarity provides interpretive value. The prediction for x∗ is formed similarly to predictions for the retrieved neighbors, offering exemplar based explana-tions aligned with human reasoning. 

4.5.3 Neighborhood Class Purity 

Inspecting neighbor class labels reveals whether a predic-tion is well supported by consistent training evidence or arises from an ambiguous region near decision boundaries. 

Definition 4.2 (Neighborhood Class Purity) . For test input 

x∗ with predicted class ˆy∗ and K nearest neighbors NK (x∗):

ρ(x∗) = 1

K

X 

> x(i)∈N K(x∗)

I[ y(i) = ˆ y∗], (21) 

where y(i) is the true label of training sample x(i).

A purity value ρ(x∗) ≈ 1 indicates the prediction is sup-ported by consistent training evidence, while ρ(x∗) ≈ 1/C 

(where C is the number of classes) suggests the sample lies in a highly ambiguous region. This provides uncertainty quantification complementing softmax confidence, as pre-dictions with high softmax confidence but low neighbor-hood purity signal potential overconfidence. 8

TABLE 2: Tabular benchmark datasets. All datasets use 80/20 train/test splits with three random seeds for statistical reliability.                                         

> Dataset Samples Features Task Domain
> Classification
> Iris 150 43-class Botany Breast Cancer 569 30 Binary Medical Wine 178 13 3-class Chemistry Adult 5,000 124 Binary Census German Credit 1,000 61 Binary Finance Bank Marketing 5,000 51 Binary Finance Covertype 10,000 54 7-class Ecology
> Regression
> Diabetes 442 10 Continuous Medical California Housing 20,640 8Continuous Economics

4.5.4 Computational Considerations 

Similarity based retrieval requires computing distances be-tween the test contribution vector and all training embed-dings. For large training sets, approximate nearest neighbor methods (locality-sensitive hashing, hierarchical navigable small world graphs) provide efficient retrieval with sub-linear complexity in N . Storage requirement is O(N d ) for training embeddings, typically modest compared to storing training data. Embeddings are computed once after model training and cached for subsequent retrieval. For NObSP-CAM, contribution vectors have dimension C (number of channels), enabling efficient storage even for large-scale datasets. 

5 EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 

We evaluate NObSP on both tabular and vision benchmarks to demonstrate its versatility across data modalities. For tab-ular data, we compare against established attribution meth-ods on classification and regression tasks. For computer vision, we extend NObSP to NObSP-CAM and compare against gradient based class activation mapping methods. 

5.1 Tabular Experiments 

5.1.1 Datasets 

We evaluate on seven classification and two regression datasets spanning diverse domains. Table 2 summarizes the datasets. Feature counts reflect encoded features after preprocessing, numeric columns are standardized to zero mean and unit variance, categorical variables are one-hot encoded, and missing values are imputed with the median (numeric) or mapped to an explicit category (categorical). 

5.1.2 Model Architecture 

For classification, we use a feedforward network with two hidden layers (20 and 200 neurons), ReLU activations, and softmax output. For regression, hidden layers of 128 and 64 neurons with linear output. All models are trained with Adam (learning rate 3 × 10 −3, weight decay 10 −4) for 35–40 epochs with early stopping. 

5.1.3 Comparison Methods 

We compare NObSP against two established attribution methods:  

> •

Integrated Gradients (IG) [6]: Accumulates gradi-ents along a path from baseline (training mean) to input using 25 integration steps.  

> •

KernelSHAP [5]: Approximates Shapley values via weighted linear regression on feature coalitions, us-ing 50 background samples. For NObSP, we calibrate on the training split and evalu-ate on the test split. To ensure comparability with baseline-perturbation metrics, we report ∆-baseline attributions: attr k(x) = gk(xk) − gk(xbaseline  

> k

).

5.1.4 Evaluation Metrics 

Standard perturbation faithfulness evaluates scalar attri-bution rankings, whereas NObSP produces feature wise functional contributions. We therefore complement a con-ventional attribution metric with a function level metric for the setting where ground truth component functions are known. 

Attribution Faithfulness Correlation measures the Spearman correlation between mean absolute attributions per feature and prediction change when each feature is set to baseline. Higher values indicate better alignment between attributed importance and actual feature influence. We report it for comparability with prior XAI literature; it evaluates scalar rankings, not functional recovery. 

Function Reproduction Score (FRS) directly evaluates functional recovery on a synthetic additive benchmark with known components, y = |x1|+x32 +ex3 +sin(2 x4)+0 ·x5 +η,where x5 is a null feature (1,000 samples, noise level 0.01, 80/20 split, seeds 0–2, scores computed on 200 held out test samples per seed). Because additive decompositions are identifiable only up to per feature offsets, both the true component fk and the estimated contribution are centered feature wise before scoring, and the direct FRS for feature 

k is the coefficient of determination of the estimate against the centered ground truth. We also report the normalized RMSE, the mean absolute attribution assigned to the null feature (false positive magnitude), and the reconstruction R2 of summed contributions against the model output. Reconstruction measures additive output accounting, not recovery of the individual component functions. 

5.2 Vision Experiments 

5.2.1 Model Architectures 

We evaluate NObSP-CAM across four CNN architectures representing diverse design philosophies. Table 3 summa-rizes the architectures. The penultimate layer dimension directly affects calibration time for NObSP-CAM. 

5.2.2 Datasets 

We evaluate on six vision datasets spanning general object recognition, fine-grained classification, and medical imag-ing. Table 4 summarizes the datasets. DermaMNIST [29], derived from the HAM10000 dataset [30], contains dermatoscopic images of pigmented skin lesions classified into seven diagnostic categories. This 9

TABLE 3: CNN architectures evaluated for NObSP-CAM.                

> Model dzParameters Type ResNet-18 [31] 512 11.7M Residual MobileNetV2 [32] 1280 3.4M Inverted Residual EfficientNet-B0 [33] 1280 4.7M Compound Scaling RegNetY-400MF [34] 440 4.3M Regularized Design

TABLE 4: Vision benchmark datasets. Training regime in-dicates whether models were trained from scratch or fine-tuned from ImageNet pretrained weights.                                           

> Dataset Classes Train/Val Resolution Regime CIFAR-10 10 50K/10K 32 2or 32 2→128 2*Scratch CIFAR-100 100 50K/10K 32 2or 32 2→128 2*Scratch TinyImageNet 200 100K/10K 64 2→224 2Fine-tune Imagenette 10 9K/4K 224 2Fine-tune STL-10 10 5K/8K 96 2→224 2Fine-tune DermaMNIST 77K/1K 28 2→224 2Fine-tune

dataset provides a clinically relevant benchmark where in-terpretability is crucial for deployment. For CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100, models are trained from scratch. For larger resolution datasets and DermaMNIST, we fine-tune from ImageNet pretrained weights. *The CIFAR resolution depends on the checkpoint archi-tecture. Small-input ResNet-18 checkpoints are evaluated at native 32 × 32 resolution with a modified downsampling stem, whereas ImageNet-style compact backbones (Mo-bileNetV2, EfficientNet-B0, RegNetY-400MF) use 128 × 128 

resized inputs to avoid overly coarse final feature maps for CAM generation. All methods compared within a dataset and model row use the same checkpoint, preprocessing, target layer, and image indices, so method comparisons are unaffected by this choice. Table 5 reports the accuracy of the trained checkpoints analyzed in the CAM benchmark. Accuracies are adequate for studying explanations of competent models; we make no competitive accuracy claims. 

5.2.3 Comparison Methods 

We compare NObSP-CAM against three class activation mapping methods:  

> •

GradCAM [9]: Computes channel weights using gra-dients of class score with respect to feature maps, applying ReLU to retain positive contributions.  

> •

GradCAM++ [10]: Uses weighted combinations of positive partial derivatives for improved multi-instance localization.  

> •

Eigen-CAM [12]: Applies PCA to feature maps, using the first principal component as importance weights. Following GradCAM convention, we focus on positive contributions (NObSP-CAM +) for primary comparisons. 

5.2.4 Evaluation Metrics 

We evaluate on synchronized sample subsets of 200 images per dataset and model configuration, so that all CAM meth-ods within a configuration are applied to identical image indices and method comparisons are paired. TABLE 5: Top-1 validation accuracy of the checkpoints used in the CAM benchmark, as evaluated by the benchmark harness on held out validation subsets of 320–1,000 images per configuration.                

> Model CIFAR-10 TinyImageNet DermaMNIST ResNet-18 0.948 0.759 0.856 MobileNetV2 0.852 0.763 0.834 EfficientNet-B0 0.910 0.800 0.838 RegNetY-400MF 0.914 0.803 0.837

Region Deletion AUC ranks heatmap patches by mean attribution, progressively masks the highest ranked patches with a zero baseline, and integrates the normalized drop in target class probability over 10 perturbation steps (patch size 32, 16, or 8 pixels for inputs of at least 224, 128, or 64 pixels, respectively). Higher values indicate that the highlighted regions carry more evidence for the target class. We adopt this region level metric because pixel level faith-fulness correlation is mismatched to the spatial granularity of CAMs, which are coarse by construction; under that pixel level metric all methods score near zero. The faithfulness correlation results are reported in the supplementary mate-rial for completeness. 

Sparseness , computed with the Quantus framework [27] on synchronized subsets of 20–50 images per configuration, measures attribution concentration: S = 1 −∥ a∥1/(√n∥a∥2).Higher values indicate more focused explanations. Sparse-ness describes the shape of an explanation, not its correct-ness. 

5.3 Implementation Details 

All experiments use Python 3.10 with PyTorch 2.5.1 (CUDA 12.4), Captum 0.8.0, and Quantus 0.6.0 on a single NVIDIA RTX 3090 (24 GB). Sparseness and the faithfulness corre-lation are computed with Quantus; Region Deletion AUC and the tabular metrics are implemented in our benchmark harness. Vision calibration uses mixed precision (bf16) with a batched Cholesky solver. All experiments are repeated across three random seeds (0, 1, 2), and all regularized solves use λ = 10 −4. A reference implementation of NObSP is publicly available at https://github.com/santialferez/ nobsp lib. For tabular experiments, NObSP is calibrated on the training split and evaluated on the held out test split. For vision experiments, NObSP-CAM calibration em-ploys the partial regression formulation (Algorithm 1) with Cholesky solver and λ = 10 −4. Calibration is performed on validation sets (1,000–5,000 images per configuration) with coefficients cached for inference. We disclose that the images used for metric evaluation are drawn from the same validation split used for NObSP-CAM calibration (the train-ing split is consumed by model training); evaluation images are a synchronized subset, identical for all CAM methods, and the gradient based baselines require no calibration. This shared split could in principle favor NObSP-CAM, so we note that its Region Deletion AUC results remain slightly below GradCAM, which bounds any such advantage. Ta-ble 6 presents calibration times by architecture. Calibration time scales with penultimate dimension: 440–512 dimensional models complete in seconds, while 10 

TABLE 6: Calibration time by penultimate layer dimension. Once calibrated, inference requires only a forward pass plus matrix multiplication.                

> Model Feature Dim Median Time Max Time RegNetY-400MF 440 <1s <1s ResNet-18 512 6.7s ∼30s EfficientNet-B0 1280 14min 45min MobileNetV2 1280 25min 2.7h

TABLE 7: Attribution Faithfulness Correlation on tabular datasets (higher is better). Values averaged across three seeds. Best per dataset in bold .                              

> Dataset NObSP IG KernelSHAP
> Classification
> Iris 1.000 1.000 1.000
> Breast Cancer 0.946 0.981 0.922 Wine 0.916 0.991 0.980 Adult 0.861 0.986 0.819 German Credit 0.764 0.962 0.756 Bank Marketing 0.847 0.978 0.836 Covertype 0.853 0.954 0.871
> Regression
> Diabetes 0.912 0.987 0.956 California Housing 0.878 0.991 0.934

1280-dimensional models require 14–25 minutes. This one-time cost amortizes over inference, where NObSP-CAM requires only a forward pass followed by matrix multipli-cation, comparable to GradCAM without a backward pass. 

6 RESULTS 

This section presents quantitative and qualitative evaluation of NObSP on tabular and vision benchmarks, along with embedding analysis demonstrating the geometric properties of contribution vectors. 

6.1 Tabular Data Results 

6.1.1 Attribution-Faithfulness Correlation 

Table 7 presents attribution faithfulness correlation results. This metric measures alignment between attributed feature importances and actual prediction changes when features are masked. Integrated Gradients achieves the highest faithfulness across datasets, expected given IG directly optimizes for baseline-to-input attribution. NObSP achieves competitive performance, particularly on simpler datasets (Iris, Breast Cancer), and outperforms KernelSHAP on several classifi-cation datasets. 

6.1.2 Functional Decomposition Quality 

Beyond numerical metrics, NObSP provides interpretable functional forms gk(xk) revealing how each feature affects predictions across its range. Figure 2 illustrates this on the synthetic additive regression with known ground truth 

y = |x1| + x32 + ex3 + sin(2 x4) + 0 · x5 + η. NObSP accurately recovers the absolute value, cubic, exponential, and sinusoidal components, while correctly assigning the null feature x5 a negligible contribution. TABLE 8: Function Reproduction Score on the synthetic additive benchmark (mean ± SD over seeds 0–2). Direct FRS R 2 measures pointwise recovery of the centered ground truth components; Null abs. is the mean absolute attribution on the null feature x5; Recon. R 2 measures reconstruction of the model output by summed contributions. Bold marks the numerical best per column.                                      

> Method FRS R 2↑NRMSE ↓Null abs. ↓Recon. R 2↑
> NObSP 0.989 ±0.001 0.098 ±0.002 0.009 ±0.003 0.975 ±0.003 KernelSHAP 0.966 ±0.001 0.173 ±0.002 0.014 ±0.001 1.000 ±0.000
> IG 0.922 ±0.006 0.261 ±0.006 0.022 ±0.003 1.000 ±0.000

Table 8 quantifies this recovery with the Function Repro-duction Score. NObSP attains the highest direct FRS (0.989, against 0.966 for KernelSHAP and 0.922 for Integrated Gra-dients), the lowest normalized error, and the smallest false positive attribution on the null feature. KernelSHAP and Integrated Gradients reconstruct the model output exactly (reconstruction R 2 of 1.000) because both are constructed around additive output accounting, yet their pointwise re-covery of the true component functions is weaker. NObSP’s reconstruction R 2 of 0.975 reflects the interaction residual that its main effect decomposition excludes by construction. Per feature FRS scores appear in the supplementary mate-rial. This function level evaluation is the primary quanti-tative evidence for NObSP’s central claim, when the eval-uation target is recovery of the true component functions, NObSP recovers them more accurately than scalar attribu-tion methods. For real datasets, ground truth component functions are unavailable. As a diagnostic companion, the supplementary material reports a local conditional pairwise delta agree-ment analysis, which compares model output deltas with explanation deltas on observed pairs of samples differing primarily in one feature. Results there are mixed: NObSP is strongest on Iris and Breast Cancer, while KernelSHAP attains the strongest agreement on most of the remaining datasets. We report it for transparency rather than as evi-dence of uniform superiority. 

6.2 Vision Results 

6.2.1 Region Deletion AUC 

Table 9 presents Region Deletion AUC across model and dataset combinations, with 200 synchronized evaluation samples per configuration. GradCAM is the strongest method overall on this metric (mean 0.614 over the subset, against 0.604 for GradCAM++, 0.600 for NObSP-CAM, and 0.582 for Eigen-CAM). Under this region level metric, NObSP-CAM achieves faithfulness comparable to GradCAM and GradCAM++, with differ-ences that are small relative to variation across datasets and architectures: it attains the row maximum on Mo-bileNetV2 with CIFAR-10 (0.614 vs 0.601 for GradCAM) and is close to GradCAM on the remaining CIFAR-10 rows and on MobileNetV2 with TinyImageNet. GradCAM remains stronger on most TinyImageNet and DermaMNIST rows. Because the same image indices are used for all methods within each configuration, method comparisons are paired; the corresponding bootstrap intervals and significance tests 11 

Fig. 2: Functional decomposition on the synthetic additive regression with known ground truth y = |x1| + x32 + ex3 +sin(2 x4) + 0 · x5 + η. Panels show the recovered functional forms gk(xk) against the true component functions. NObSP recovers the absolute value, cubic, exponential, and sinusoidal components and correctly assigns the null feature x5 anegligible contribution. TABLE 9: Region Deletion AUC on vision benchmarks (higher is better). The metric ranks heatmap patches by attri-bution, masks the highest ranked regions, and integrates the normalized drop in target class probability; higher values indicate that highlighted regions contain more target class evidence. Values are means over 200 synchronized image samples per row. Bold marks the numerical maximum per row, not statistical significance.                                                            

> Model Dataset GradCAM GradCAM++ Eigen-CAM NObSP ResNet-18 CIFAR-10 0.629 0.610 0.647 0.611 ResNet-18 TinyImageNet 0.718 0.699 0.632 0.697 ResNet-18 DermaMNIST 0.582 0.552 0.534 0.549 MobileNetV2 CIFAR-10 0.601 0.604 0.580 0.614
> MobileNetV2 TinyImageNet 0.659 0.659 0.635 0.656 MobileNetV2 DermaMNIST 0.553 0.550 0.533 0.535 EfficientNet-B0 CIFAR-10 0.551 0.549 0.521 0.540 EfficientNet-B0 TinyImageNet 0.720 0.709 0.659 0.703 EfficientNet-B0 DermaMNIST 0.561 0.563 0.559 0.552 RegNetY-400MF CIFAR-10 0.593 0.597 0.587 0.595 RegNetY-400MF TinyImageNet 0.685 0.674 0.640 0.673 RegNetY-400MF DermaMNIST 0.516 0.478 0.460 0.478

are summarized in Section 6.4. The distinct contribution of NObSP-CAM is therefore not superior deletion perfor-mance, but its calibrated decomposition into positive and negative evidence, requiring no backward pass at inference. Results for the full profile of six datasets and four backbones TABLE 10: Sparseness on vision benchmarks (higher in-dicates more focused attributions). Values are means over synchronized subsets of 20–50 images per row. Bold marks the numerical maximum per row, not statistical significance. Model 1 is ResNet-18, model 2 is EfficientNet-B0, and model 3 is RegNetY-400MF. 

Model Dataset GradCAM GradCAM++ Eigen-CAM NObSP 1CIFAR-10 0.258 0.259 0.617 0.264 TinyImageNet 0.404 0.373 0.695 0.375 DermaMNIST 0.472 0.392 0.718 0.402 2CIFAR-10 0.289 0.285 0.529 0.293 TinyImageNet 0.599 0.652 0.758 0.562 DermaMNIST 0.545 0.699 0.812 0.586 3CIFAR-10 0.235 0.235 0.569 0.229 TinyImageNet 0.595 0.567 0.745 0.564 DermaMNIST 0.624 0.544 0.775 0.583 

(24 configurations) appear in the supplementary material and show the same pattern. 

6.2.2 Sparseness 

Table 10 presents sparseness results measuring attribution concentration. Eigen-CAM consistently produces the sparsest attribu-tions, expected from its PCA-based approach concentrat-12 

TABLE 11: Neighborhood retrieval on TinyImageNet ( K =8). NObSP embeddings computed using the predicted class improve purity and substantially reduce neighbor distance compared to raw activations.          

> Embedding Purity@8 Mean Purity@8 Median Mean kNN Dist. Raw Activations 0.654 0.875 0.855 NObSP (Pred) 0.713 1.000 0.408

ing attribution on dominant directions. GradCAM, Grad-CAM++, and NObSP-CAM produce comparable sparse-ness, with NObSP-CAM slightly less sparse on average. This reflects NObSP-CAM’s inclusion of contributions from multiple channels rather than focusing on a single dominant component. Read together with Table 9, sparseness and faithfulness dissociate: Eigen-CAM is the sparsest method yet obtains the lowest Region Deletion AUC, so concentra-tion of an explanation does not by itself indicate that the highlighted regions carry class evidence. 

6.2.3 Qualitative Analysis 

Figure 3 presents representative CAM comparisons. On general object recognition, all methods highlight similar discriminative regions, with NObSP-CAM producing com-parable localization to gradient based approaches. On medical imaging (DermaMNIST, Figure 4), NObSP-CAM qualitatively suggests improved background suppres-sion on these examples, highlighting lesion cores while re-ducing activation on surrounding healthy skin. A systematic localization evaluation with lesion masks remains future work. 

6.3 Embedding Analysis Results 

We evaluate the NObSP embedding space on TinyImageNet (200 classes, 224 ×224) using ResNet-18, comparing contri-bution embeddings computed using the model’s predicted class against raw penultimate layer activations. The training set (100,000 images) serves as the kNN database and the validation set (10,000 images) as queries, with K = 8

neighbors and Euclidean distance after z-score followed by L2 normalization. 

6.3.1 Neighborhood Purity 

Table 11 presents purity@ K results. The NObSP embed-ding improves mean class purity (0.713 vs 0.654 for raw activations at K = 8) and reaches a median purity of 1.0, while reducing mean neighbor distance by more than half. This suggests that contribution vectors capture the classifier’s decision geometry rather than merely feature space structure. The NObSP embedding improves mean purity by ap-proximately 6 percentage points (0.654 to 0.713) while reduc-ing mean kNN distance by more than half (0.855 to 0.408). The median purity of 1.0 indicates that the majority of val-idation queries achieve perfect same class neighborhoods; the lower mean reflects the minority of misclassified sam-ples, whose contribution vectors are computed against the incorrect predicted class and consequently attract neighbors from that wrong class. This asymmetry is itself informative, low purity under NObSP embedding signals likely misclas-sification, providing an unsupervised confidence measure that complements softmax scores. Importantly, high neighborhood purity is only inter-pretable jointly with prediction correctness. For correctly classified samples, high purity provides trustworthy visual evidence supporting the prediction (Figure 5a, 5b). For confidently misclassified samples, however, high purity can reinforce incorrect decisions by retrieving coherent evidence for the wrong class (Figure 5c), while activation neighbors may preserve useful ambiguity. This asymmetry suggests that NObSP retrieval is most valuable as an auditing tool when combined with complementary signals such as acti-vation space retrieval or softmax calibration. 

6.3.2 Qualitative Retrieval Analysis 

Figure 5 presents retrieval panels for representative bound-ary and outlier cases, comparing NObSP and activation neighbors side by side. Boundary cases are defined by activation space purity in [0 .4, 0.7] , identifying queries that are ambiguous in the raw feature space; outlier cases are queries whose class conditional centroid distance exceeds the 95th percentile. In panel (a), an Arabian camel image is correctly clas-sified with high confidence (0.91). The NObSP neighbors are four camels at distances d ≤ 0.43 , providing coherent visual evidence for the prediction. The activation neighbors include African elephants, large animals in similar outdoor settings, that share feature space structure but belong to the wrong class. Panel (b) shows an analogous pattern for a poncho (conf. 0.82): NObSP retrieves four ponchos while ac-tivation neighbors include vestments and fur coats, semanti-cally related garments from incorrect classes. In both cases, NObSP embedding isolates the decision relevant features, producing neighbors that directly support the prediction. Panel (c) reveals an important limitation. A picket fence is confidently misclassified as a space heater (0.90), and NObSP retrieves four space heaters, objects whose repeating grid patterns visually resemble the fence slats. The NObSP embedding faithfully reflects the model’s reasoning, but in doing so reinforces an incorrect decision with coherent evidence. The activation neighbors, by contrast, include two actual picket fences, exposing an ambiguity that the NObSP embedding suppresses. This demonstrates that high NObSP purity is only reliable as supporting evidence when the underlying prediction is correct; for confident misclassifica-tions, activation space retrieval can provide a complemen-tary diagnostic. Panels (d) and (e) show outlier cases. In (d), a triumphal arch misclassified as a suspension bridge (conf. 0.54) pro-duces mixed architectural neighbors in both spaces, bridges, arches, fountains, viaducts, reflecting genuine visual ambi-guity in the stone-arch query. The low confidence combined with mixed neighborhoods consistently signals an unreli-able prediction. In (e), an image labeled as rugby ball is pre-dicted as seashore (conf. 0.66); both NObSP and activation neighbors are dominated by beach scenes, consistent with the visual content. The absence of rugby ball related images in either embedding space suggests a potential labeling error rather than a model failure, illustrating how retrieval can serve as an auditing tool for dataset quality. 13 

Fig. 3: Qualitative comparison of class activation maps across datasets (EfficientNet-B0). Each row shows a different sample with columns: original image, NObSP-CAM (positive contributions), GradCAM, GradCAM++, and Eigen-CAM. Row labels indicate predicted class and confidence. All methods highlight similar discriminative regions. Together, these panels show that NObSP retrieval en-hances interpretability by providing class consistent evi-dence when the model is correct, while its behavior under misclassification, either reinforcing errors or exposing un-certainty, provides complementary diagnostic information about prediction reliability. 

6.4 Statistical Summary 

Region Deletion AUC comparisons are paired at the level of image and model evaluations, within each dataset and model configuration, all methods are evaluated on identi-cal image indices. We report paired bootstrap confidence intervals (10,000 resamples) and sign flip randomization tests with Holm correction for the NObSP-CAM minus 14 

Fig. 4: CAM comparison on DermaMNIST dermatoscopic images. Columns: original image, GradCAM, NObSP-CAM + (positive evidence). In these examples, NObSP-CAM shows stronger background suppression, highlighting le-sion cores while reducing activation on surrounding skin. GradCAM difference. On the paper subset (Table 9), the difference is not sig-nificant on any CIFAR-10 row for any of the four backbones (on MobileNetV2 the point estimate favors NObSP-CAM, 

+0 .013 , 95% CI [0 .0003 , 0.026] , corrected p = 1 ), nor on Mo-bileNetV2 with TinyImageNet or EfficientNet-B0 with Der-maMNIST. GradCAM is significantly ahead on the remain-ing six TinyImageNet and DermaMNIST rows (corrected 

p ≤ 0.008 ), with the largest difference on RegNetY-400MF with DermaMNIST ( −0.038 , 95% CI [−0.051 , −0.027] ). Aggregating the full profile of six datasets and four backbones (24 configurations, 200 synchronized samples each, 4,784 paired image and model evaluations), the paired NObSP-CAM minus GradCAM difference is −0.011 with 95% CI [−0.012 , −0.009] and Holm corrected sign flip 

p = 0 .0003 . This small GradCAM advantage is statistically detectable because n is large, but it is minor in absolute Region Deletion AUC units and comparable to typical row to row variation. Sparseness differences are large and consistent in direction: Eigen-CAM is the sparsest method in every configuration, while NObSP-CAM is slightly less sparse than GradCAM, consistent with its richer channel decomposition. 

7 DISCUSSION 

7.1 Why NObSP Works 

A natural question is, why does NObSP recover meaningful functional contributions? The main idea is that the neural network has already learned the nonlinear transformations. When the network is well trained, the penultimate represen-tation z = fN N →L−1(x) encodes how the model processes each input feature. NObSP does not discover these transfor-mations; it reads them out from the learned representation. This explains our empirical observation that NObSP recovers true functional forms when the model is well-trained but produces less meaningful results for poorly trained models. This is not a limitation, it is the correct behavior for a method that extracts the learned function rather than imposing external structure. The quality of NObSP decomposition directly reflects the quality of the learned underlying model. The oblique projection framework is essential when learned representations exhibit overlap. Neural networks commonly represent multiple features in shared dimen-sions, a phenomenon known as superposition [22]. Classical ANOVA decomposition assumes orthogonality and fails under superposition. Oblique projections isolate the unique contribution of each feature by projecting along the space of other features, correctly handling representational overlap. An important practical finding is that samples with low NObSP neighborhood purity under predicted class targeting reliably correspond to misclassified inputs. This positions the embedding as an unsupervised error-detection tool. At inference time, without any labels, low purity flags predictions that warrant human review or additional verifi-cation. 

7.2 Connection to Mechanistic Interpretability 

The emerging field of mechanistic interpretability seeks to reverse engineer neural network computations by identi-fying interpretable features and circuits [25], [26], [38], de-composing internal representations with sparse dictionary learning [36], [37], and interpreting feed-forward layers as key-value memories [35]. NObSP offers a complementary perspective. While mechanistic interpretability typically op-erates at the neuron or attention head level, NObSP provides input-output level interpretability through functional de-composition. The subspaces Vk can be viewed as encoding learned features, while the contribution functions gk(xk)

describe how these features influence predictions. Extend-ing NObSP to transformer architectures, where the residual stream provides natural subspace structure, remains an interesting direction for future work. 15   

> (a) (b)
> (c) (d)
> (e)

Fig. 5: Similarity-based retrieval on TinyImageNet using NObSP embeddings (top row in each panel) vs. raw activations (bottom row). Each panel shows a query image (left) with its predicted class and confidence, followed by its four nearest neighbors labeled with ground-truth class and Euclidean distance d. Panels (a)–(b): boundary cases where NObSP retrieves class-consistent neighbors while activations return visually similar but wrong-class images. Panel (c): a confident misclassification where NObSP reinforces the error while activations expose the ambiguity. Panels (d)–(e): outlier cases where both spaces reveal genuine uncertainty, with (e) suggesting a potential labeling error. 

7.3 Metric Considerations 

No single XAI evaluation metric is method neutral. Deletion based metrics favor perturbation stable scalar attributions and may penalize functional decompositions; completeness and reconstruction metrics favor methods designed to sat-isfy summation constraints, such as Integrated Gradients and SHAP; CAM metrics depend strongly on heatmap granularity and normalization, as the contrast between pixel level faithfulness correlation and Region Deletion AUC in Section 6.2 illustrates. We therefore report conventional metrics for comparability, and evaluate NObSP’s central claim with function level metrics whenever ground truth is available. This positioning is reflected plainly in the results. NObSP does not dominate scalar attribution metrics. Integrated Gradients attains the best tabular faithfulness, KernelSHAP attains the strongest local pairwise agreement on several real datasets, and GradCAM is slightly ahead on Region Deletion AUC. NObSP’s contribution is a different explana-tion object, explicit per feature contribution functions with separable positive and negative evidence, whose functional recovery can be tested directly in known function settings; 16 

there it is the most accurate of the compared methods (Table 8). 

7.4 Limitations 

Several limitations merit consideration. 

Calibration requirement. Unlike gradient methods that operate per-sample, NObSP requires calibration on multiple samples to estimate oblique projections. While this is a one time cost that amortizes over inference, it prevents immediate application to new models without calibration data. 

Linear final layer assumption. The theoretical frame-work assumes a linear mapping from penultimate layer to outputs. While this holds for standard classification and regression heads, architectures with nonlinear output layers would require adaptation. 

Baseline choice. Setting inactive features to zero as-sumes normalized inputs where zero represents the pop-ulation mean. For non-normalized data or domains where zero has different semantics, alternative baselines may be needed. 

Higher-order interactions. Computing interaction terms 

gkm (xk, x m) requires  d

> 2

 additional subspace constructions. For high-dimensional inputs, exhaustive interaction analy-sis becomes computationally prohibitive, though targeted analysis of specific feature pairs remains tractable. Diag-nostics based on the size of the interaction residual proved difficult to interpret in preliminary experiments and are left to future work. 

Negative contributions. The NObSP framework nat-urally produces both positive and negative contribution maps, where negative values indicate evidence against the target class. While potentially informative, interpretation of negative contributions requires further study. The present work focuses exclusively on positive contributions for direct comparability with established methods; systematic analy-sis of negative evidence maps remains an avenue for future investigation. 

7.5 Retrieval as a Diagnostic Tool 

The embedding analysis reveals a nuanced relationship be-tween neighborhood purity and prediction reliability. Low NObSP purity reliably flags uncertain or incorrect predic-tions, as mixed class neighbors indicate the query lies near a decision boundary. However, high purity does not guar-antee correctness. When the model is confidently wrong, the contribution embedding retrieves coherent evidence for the incorrect class (Figure 5c), potentially masking the error. This asymmetry means that NObSP purity and activation space purity provide complementary diagnostics, the for-mer reflects the classifier’s decision geometry while the latter reflects feature space structure. Developing joint con-fidence measures that combine both signals is a promising direction for future work. Additionally, retrieval can serve as a dataset auditing tool. When both embedding spaces agree that a sample’s visual content is inconsistent with its label (Figure 5e), this flags potential annotation errors for human review. 

7.6 Future Directions 

Several extensions merit exploration. First, the NObSP em-bedding space enables similarity based retrieval that im-proves class purity over raw activations; leveraging this for active learning, prototype selection, or dataset curation could yield practical benefits, particularly when combined with activation space retrieval for joint confidence estima-tion. Second, features with consistently small contributions across their range are natural candidates for pruning; in-vestigating the connection between NObSP contributions and network compression is promising. Third, extending NObSP to sequence models and transformers, where atten-tion patterns and residual streams provide rich subspace structure, could broaden applicability to language and mul-timodal domains. 

8 CONCLUSION 

We presented NObSP, a mathematically principled frame-work for neural network interpretability based on oblique subspace projections. The key insight is that all nonlinearity resides in the mapping to the penultimate layer, while the final layer is linear, enabling a projection based decomposi-tion into per feature main effects with an explicit residual capturing interactions. Our contributions include: (1) a theoretical framework connecting oblique projections to functional ANOVA de-composition, with uniqueness guarantees under explicit assumptions; (2) an efficient algorithm reducing complex-ity from O(N 2) to O(dz ) for out-of-sample evaluation; (3) NObSP-CAM, extending the framework to convolu-tional networks with class activation maps grounded in the oblique projection framework; and (4) preliminary evidence that NObSP contribution vectors form a useful retrieval em-bedding, improving neighborhood purity from 0.65 to 0.71 over raw activations and halving mean neighbor distances, without requiring ground truth labels. Experiments across tabular and vision benchmarks show that NObSP achieves faithfulness comparable to established attribution methods while providing a complementary form of interpretability unavailable from scalar attributions, ex-plicit per feature contribution functions. Unlike methods designed for either local or global interpretation, NObSP provides unified analysis, the same decomposition yields both instance specific explanations and dataset wide func-tional relationships. As neural networks are deployed in high risk do-mains requiring transparency and accountability, mathe-matically grounded interpretability methods become essen-tial. NObSP offers a mathematical framework to under-standing how learned representations transform inputs into predictions. 

REFERENCES       

> [1] F. Doshi-Velez and B. Kim, “Towards a rigorous science of inter-pretable machine learning”, arXiv:1702.08608 , 2017. [2] Z. C. Lipton, “The mythos of model interpretability”, Communica-tions of the ACM , vol. 61, no. 10, pp. 36–43, 2018. [3] B. Goodman and S. Flaxman, “European Union regulations on algorithmic decision-making and a right to explanation”, AI Mag-azine , vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 50–57, 2017. 17

[4] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “Why should I trust you?: Explaining the predictions of any classifier”, in Proc. KDD , 2016, pp. 1135–1144. [5] S. M. Lundberg and S.-I. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting model predictions”, in Proc. NeurIPS , 2017, pp. 4765–4774. [6] M. Sundararajan, A. Taly, and Q. Yan, “Axiomatic attribution for deep networks”, in Proc. ICML , 2017, pp. 3319–3328. [7] A. Shrikumar, P. Greenside, and A. Kundaje, “Learning impor-tant features through propagating activation differences”, in Proc. ICML , 2017, pp. 3145–3153. [8] B. Zhou, A. Khosla, A. Lapedriza, A. Oliva, and A. Torralba, “Learning deep features for discriminative localization”, in Proc. CVPR , 2016, pp. 2921–2929. [9] R. R. Selvaraju et al. , “Grad-CAM: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based localization”, in Proc. ICCV , 2017, pp. 618–626. [10] A. Chattopadhay, A. Sarkar, P. Howlader, and V. N. Balasubrama-nian, “Grad-CAM++: Generalized gradient-based visual explana-tions for deep convolutional networks”, in Proc. WACV , 2018, pp. 839–847. [11] H. Wang et al. , “Score-CAM: Score-weighted visual explanations for convolutional neural networks”, in Proc. CVPR Workshops ,2020, pp. 24–25. [12] M. B. Muhammad and M. Yeasin, “Eigen-CAM: Class activation map using principal components”, in Proc. IJCNN , 2020, pp. 1–7. [13] J. H. Friedman, “Greedy function approximation: A gradient boosting machine”, Annals of Statistics , vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 1189– 1232, 2001. [14] A. Goldstein, A. Kapelner, J. Bleich, and E. Pitkin, “Peeking inside the black box: Visualizing statistical learning with plots of individual conditional expectation”, Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics , vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 44–65, 2015. [15] D. W. Apley and J. Zhu, “Visualizing the effects of predictor variables in black box supervised learning models”, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B , vol. 82, no. 4, pp. 1059–1086, 2020. [16] R. Agarwal et al. , “Neural additive models: Interpretable machine learning with neural nets”, in Proc. NeurIPS , 2021, pp. 4699–4711. [17] Y. Lou, R. Caruana, and J. Gehrke, “Intelligible models for classi-fication and regression”, in Proc. KDD , 2012, pp. 150–158. [18] A. N. Kolmogorov, “On the representation of continuous functions of many variables by superposition of continuous functions of one variable and addition”, Doklady Akademii Nauk SSSR , vol. 114, pp. 953–956, 1957. [19] V. I. Arnold, “On functions of three variables”, Doklady Akademii Nauk SSSR , vol. 114, pp. 679–681, 1957. [20] W. Hoeffding, “A class of statistics with asymptotically normal distribution”, Annals of Mathematical Statistics , vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 293–325, 1948. [21] G. Hooker, “Generalized functional ANOVA diagnostics for high-dimensional functions of dependent variables”, Journal of Compu-tational and Graphical Statistics , vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 709–732, 2007. [22] N. Elhage et al. , “Toy models of superposition”, Anthropic, 2022. [23] R. T. Behrens and L. L. Scharf, “Signal processing applications of oblique projection operators”, IEEE Trans. Signal Processing , vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1413–1424, 1994. [24] A. Caicedo, C. Varon, S. Van Huffel, and J. A. K. Suykens, “Non-linear oblique subspace projections for LS-SVM regression”, PLOS ONE , vol. 14, no. 6, p. e0217967, 2019. [25] C. Olah et al. , “Zoom in: An introduction to circuits”, Distill , 2020. [26] A. Conmy, A. N. Mavor-Parker, A. Lynch, S. Heimersheim, and A. Garriga-Alonso, “Towards automated circuit discovery for mech-anistic interpretability”, in Proc. NeurIPS , 2023. [27] A. Hedstr ¨ om et al. , “Quantus: An explainable AI toolkit for re-sponsible evaluation of neural network explanations and beyond”, 

Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 24, no. 34, pp. 1–11, 2023. [28] K. Simonyan, A. Vedaldi, and A. Zisserman, “Deep inside con-volutional networks: Visualising image classification models and saliency maps”, in Proc. ICLR Workshop , 2014. [29] J. Yang et al. , “MedMNIST v2: A large-scale lightweight bench-mark for 2D and 3D biomedical image classification”, Scientific Data , vol. 10, p. 41, 2023. [30] P. Tschandl, C. Rosendahl, and H. Kittler, “The HAM10000 dataset, a large collection of multi-source dermatoscopic images of com-mon pigmented skin lesions”, Scientific Data , vol. 5, p. 180161, 2018. [31] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image recognition”, in Proc. CVPR , 2016, pp. 770–778. [32] M. Sandler, A. Howard, M. Zhu, A. Zhmoginov, and L.-C. Chen, “MobileNetV2: Inverted residuals and linear bottlenecks”, in Proc. CVPR , 2018, pp. 4510–4520. [33] M. Tan and Q. Le, “EfficientNet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural networks”, in Proc. ICML , 2019, pp. 6105– 6114. [34] I. Radosavovic, R. P. Kosaraju, R. Girshick, K. He, and P. Doll´ ar, “Designing network design spaces”, in Proc. CVPR , 2020, pp. 10428–10436. [35] M. Geva, R. Schuster, J. Berant, and O. Levy, “Transformer feed-forward layers are key-value memories,” in Proc. EMNLP , 2021, pp. 5484–5495. [36] H. Cunningham, A. Ewart, L. Riggs, R. Huben, and L. Sharkey, “Sparse autoencoders find highly interpretable features in lan-guage models,” in Proc. ICLR , 2024. [37] T. Bricken et al. , “Towards monosemanticity: Decomposing lan-guage models with dictionary learning,” Anthropic, 2023. [38] K. Wang et al. , “Interpretability in the wild: A circuit for indirect object identification in GPT-2 small,” in Proc. ICLR , 2023. [39] T. J. Hastie and R. J. Tibshirani, Generalized Additive Models . Lon-don, UK: Chapman & Hall, 1990. 

Alexander Caicedo Alexander Caicedo re-ceived the B.Eng. degree (Hons.) in Electron-ics Engineering and the M.Sc. degree in Indus-trial Control Engineering from the University of Ibagu ´ e, Colombia. He earned his Ph.D. degree in Engineering from KU Leuven, Belgium. He is currently an Associate Professor with the De-partment of Electronic Engineering at Pontificia Universidad Javeriana, Bogot ´ a. His research in-terests lie at the intersection of biomedical sig-nal processing, machine learning, and advanced data analytics. His work is primarily focused on the development of interpretable and explainable artificial intelligence models designed to bridge the gap between complex algorithmic outputs and transparent decision-making in practical settings. Additionally, he is dedicated to the theoretical advancement of machine learning architectures, specifically aiming to optimize training efficiency and reduce computational resource requirements to promote the democratization of high-performance AI. Through his research, he seeks to integrate sophisticated signal pro-cessing techniques with robust learning frameworks to enhance diag-nostic and prognostic capabilities across diverse application domains. 

V´ ıctor De La Hoz received the B.S. degree in mathematics from Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Bogot ´ a, Colombia, in 2021, and the M.S. degree (cum laude) in artificial intelligence from Pontificia Universidad Javeriana, Bogot ´ a, Colombia, in 2024. He is currently a part-time lecturer at Pontificia Universidad Javeriana, where he teaches artificial intelligence funda-mentals and mathematics for AI. He also works as a Data Scientist at MercadoLibre, Colombia, focusing on large language model training, eval-uation, and deployment. His research interests include continued pre-training of large language models, model merging, and interpretability of deep neural networks. 18 

Santiago Alf ´ erez holds B.S. degrees in Physics and in Electronics Engineering and an M.Sc. in Electronics Engineering from the Universidad Industrial de Santander, Colombia, and a Ph.D. in Biomedical Engineering from the Universi-tat Polit ` ecnica de Catalunya (UPC), Barcelona, Spain, where he is an Assistant Professor with the Department of Mathematics at the East Barcelona School of Engineering (EEBE). His research combines computer vision and deep learning for biomedical applications, particularly digital pathology and medical imaging. He develops explainable AI models for the automatic recognition of cellular abnormalities, together with generative modeling and evaluation methodologies that make deep learning systems clinically meaningful and trustworthy. He is Principal Investigator of a national project on explainable deep learning in medical image analysis, and will head the UPC team in the recently awarded Marie Skłodowska-Curie Doctoral Network BlueOcean on AI-assisted monitoring of marine ecosystems. SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL 1

# Supplementary Material for NObSP: Functional Decomposition of Neural Networks via Oblique Subspace Projections 

Alexander Caicedo, V´ ıctor De La Hoz, and Santiago Alf ´ erez 

✦

Numbered references to theorems, algorithms, sections, equations, and citations of the form (3.2), (4.1), and so on refer to the main text. 

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL A: F ULL PROOFS 

This supplementary provides complete proofs for the theo-rems in Section 3. Theorem numbers follow the main text: Theorem 3.1 (Generalized ANOVA), Theorem 3.2 (Predic-tion Decomposition), Theorem 3.3 (Uniqueness), and Theo-rem 4.1 (Partial Regression Equivalence). 

A.1 Preliminaries and Notation 

Let Ak ∈ RN ×rk span subspace Vk, and A(k) ∈ RN ×r(k)

span V(k), with Vk ∩ V (k) = {0}.The orthogonal complement projector is: 

Q(k) = I − A(k)(AT

(k)A(k))†AT

(k). (A.1) The oblique projector onto Vk along V(k) is: 

Pk/ (k) = Ak(ATk Q(k)Ak)†ATk Q(k). (A.2) 

A.2 Proof of Theorem 3.1 (Generalized ANOVA) 

Theorem 3.1. The oblique projection decomposition 

y =

dX

k=1 

Pk/ (k)y + r (A.3) 

provides an ANOV A-like decomposition that (i) reduces to clas-sical ANOV A when subspaces are orthogonal, (ii) handles non-orthogonal subspaces, and (iii) provides unique main effects. Proof. We prove each property and characterize gk(xk),

gk,m (xk, x m), and higher-order terms in r.

Property (i): Orthogonal case. 

When Vk ⊥ V (k), any v ∈ V k satisfies Q(k)v = v.Substituting into (A.2): 

Pk/ (k) = Ak(ATk Ak)†ATk

= P⊥

k , (A.4) the orthogonal projector used in classical ANOVA. 

Property (ii): Non-orthogonal case. 

The matrix Q(k) first removes the component in V(k):

y′ = Q(k)y = y − P(k)y. (A.5) Then Ak(ATk Q(k)Ak)†ATk projects onto Vk. For any v ∈V(k):

Pk/ (k)v = 0, (A.6) confirming vectors in the reference subspace are annihilated. 

Property (iii): Uniqueness. 

The main effect for feature k is: 

ˆyk = Pk/ (k)y, (A.7) containing [gk(x(1) 

k ), . . . , g k(x(N )

k )] T . Uniqueness follows from uniqueness of the oblique projector given the direct sum decomposition. 

Functional forms and interactions. 

The full ANOVA decomposition is: 

f (x) = f0 +

dX

k=1 

gk(xk)+ X

k<m 

gk,m (xk, x m) + . . . + G(x), (A.8) where gk are main effects, gk,m are second-order interac-tions, and G captures higher orders. The oblique projection extracts main effects: 

Pk/ (k)y = gk. (A.9) The residual contains all interaction terms: 

r = y −

dX

k=1 

Pk/ (k)y

= f0 + X

k<m 

gk,m + (higher order) . (A.10) 

Computing second-order interactions. 

For features k and m, construct the joint input: 

Xk,m = [ 0, . . . , xk, . . . , xm, . . . , 0], (A.11) with only features k and m active. The representations are: 

Zk,m = fN N →L−1(Xk,m ). (A.12) The joint projection yields: 

P(k,m )/(k,m )y = gk + gm + gk,m . (A.13) SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL 2

The pure interaction is obtained by subtraction: 

gk,m = P(k,m )/(k,m )y

− Pk/ (k)y − Pm/ (m)y. (A.14) 

Higher-order interactions. 

For r-th order interactions among {k1, . . . , k r }:

gk1,...,k r = P(k1,...,k r )y

− X

> lower-order terms

. (A.15) The limitation is combinatorial (  dr

 terms), not mathe-matical. 

Complete decomposition. 

Combining the above: 

y =

> d

X

> k=1

gk

| {z } 

> main effects

+ X

> k<m

gk,m 

| {z }

> 2nd-order

+ G + f0

| {z } 

> higher-order in r

. (A.16) When only main effects are computed: 

r = f0 + X

> k<m

gk,m + . . . (A.17) 

A.3 Proof of Theorem 3.2 (Prediction Decomposition) 

Theorem 3.2. For a network with linear final layer: 

ˆyj =

> d

X

> k=1

gk,j (xk) + rj + bj , (A.18) 

where gk,j (xk) = ˜ z⊤ 

> k

Ωkwj is the contribution of feature k to output j, and Ωk =   ˜ZTk Q(k) ˜Zk

† ˜ZTk Q(k) ˜Z ∈ Rdz ×dz is the transfer matrix of Theorem 3.2. Proof. The final layer is linear: 

ˆyj = wTj z + bj . (A.19) For N samples with Z ∈ RN ×dz :

ˆyj = Zw j + bj 1. (A.20) After centering with M = I − 1 

> N

11 T :

˜yj = MZw j . (A.21) Applying Theorem 3.1: 

˜yj =

> d

X

> k=1

Pk/ (k) ˜yj + ˜ rj . (A.22) The contribution of feature k to output j:

gk,j = Pk/ (k) ˜yj . (A.23) By the partial regression equivalence (Theorem 4.1), the contribution vector factorizes through the isolated represen-tations, gk,j = ˜ZkΩkwj . Its i-th entry gives the per sample contribution: 

gk,j (x(i) 

> k

) = [ gk,j ]i = ˜ z(i)⊤ 

> k

Ωkwj . (A.24) The dependence on sample i enters only through the iso-lated representation ˜z(i) 

> k

, obtained by a forward pass on the isolated input. Note that the projector Pk/ (k) ∈ RN ×N acts on vectors in sample space and is never applied to a single latent vector z ∈ Rdz .The residual contains interactions: 

rj = X

> k<m

gk,m,j (xk, x m)+ (higher-order) + ( bj − ¯yj ). (A.25) 

A.4 Proof of Theorem 3.3 (Uniqueness) 

Theorem 3.3. Given trained network fN N , data X, baseline choice, and Vk ∩ V (k) = {0} for all k, the NObSP decomposition is unique. Proof. Step 1: Unique subspaces. 

The matrices Zk = fN N →L−1(Xk) are uniquely deter-mined by the fixed network and data. Thus Vk = col (˜Zk) ⊆

RN is unique. 

Step 2: Unique projectors. 

Given Vk and V(k) with Vk ∩ V (k) = {0}, the oblique projector Pk/ (k) is unique. When subspaces intersect, the pseudoinverse provides the unique minimum-norm solu-tion. 

Step 3: Unique contributions. 

With unique Pk/ (k) and fixed weights wj , the coefficient vector βk,j = (˜ZTk Q(k) ˜Zk)† ˜ZTk Q(k) ˜yj is uniquely deter-mined, and thus the per-sample contribution 

gk,j (x(i) 

> k

) = ˜ z(i)⊤ 

> k

βk,j (A.26) is uniquely determined. 

Remark. Different methods (SHAP, LIME, NObSP) yield different attributions because they define “contribution” differently, a methodological choice, not non-uniqueness within NObSP. 

A.5 Proof of Theorem 4.1 (Equivalence of Partial Regres-sion Formulation) 

Theorem 4.1. The contribution ˜Zkβk,j computed via Algo-rithm 1 coincides with the oblique projection of ˆyj onto Vk along 

V(k): ˜Zkβk,j = Pk/ (k) ˆyj .Proof. Consider Algorithm 1 in the limit λ → 0, where the regularized inverses converge to Moore–Penrose pseudoin-verses. 

Step 1: The residual steps implement Q(k). With A =(˜ZT 

> (k)

˜Z(k))† ˜ZT

> (k)

, Steps 2 and 3 compute 

ˆyres =  I − ˜Z(k)(˜ZT 

> (k)

˜Z(k))† ˜ZT

> (k)

ˆyj = Q(k) ˆyj , (A.27) 

˜Zres = Q(k) ˜Zk, (A.28) where Q(k) is the orthogonal complement projector of (A.1) with A(k) = ˜Z(k).

Step 2: Coefficient formula. Step 4 solves the least squares problem on the residuals: 

βk,j = ( ˜ZTres ˜Zres )† ˜ZTres ˆyres 

=   ˜ZTk QT

> (k)

Q(k) ˜Zk

† ˜ZTk QT

> (k)

Q(k) ˆyj . (A.29) SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL 3

Since Q(k) is an orthogonal projector, it is symmetric (QT 

> (k)

= Q(k)) and idempotent ( Q2(k) = Q(k)), hence 

βk,j =   ˜ZTk Q(k) ˜Zk

† ˜ZTk Q(k) ˆyj . (A.30) 

Step 3: Identification with the oblique projection. 

Multiplying (A.30) by ˜Zk and comparing with the projector definition (A.2) evaluated at Ak = ˜Zk:

˜Zkβk,j = ˜Zk

  ˜ZTk Q(k) ˜Zk

† ˜ZTk Q(k) ˆyj = Pk/ (k) ˆyj . (A.31) 

Step 4: Transfer matrix form. Applying (A.30) to the centered predictions ˜yj = ˜Zw j gives βk,j = Ωkwj with 

Ωk = ( ˜ZTk Q(k) ˜Zk)† ˜ZTk Q(k) ˜Z, the transfer matrix of Theo-rem 3.2. We emphasize that Ωk maps final layer weights to contribution coefficients; it is in general neither symmetric nor idempotent, and it is not a projector on the latent space. For λ > 0, Algorithm 1 returns a ridge regularized ver-sion of (A.30); the equivalence holds exactly as λ → 0.

SUPPLEMENTARY B: A LGORITHM DETAILS 

This supplementary section provides complete algorithmic details for the NObSP framework, including the direct oblique projection method and the detailed subspace con-struction procedure. These materials complement the effi-cient partial regression formulation presented in the main text. 

B.1 Detailed Subspace Construction 

The construction of feature subspaces proceeds through five steps. We assume inputs have been normalized to zero mean and unit variance; for non-normalized data, replace zeros with feature means throughout. 

Step 1: Input Normalization. If not already performed during training, normalize inputs to zero mean and unit variance: 

x(i) 

> k

← x(i) 

> k

− ¯xk

σk

, (B.1) where ¯xk = 1

> N

PNi=1 x(i) 

> k

and σ2 

> k

= 1

> N

PNi=1 (x(i) 

> k

− ¯xk)2.This ensures consistency between the zero baseline and the training distribution. 

Step 2: Isolated Input Construction. For each feature 

k ∈ { 1, . . . , d }, construct the isolated input matrix where only feature k is active: 

Xk = [ 0, . . . , 0, xk, 0, . . . , 0] ∈ RN ×d, (B.2) where only the k-th column contains the observed feature values xk = [ x(1)  

> k

, . . . , x (N ) 

> k

]T and all remaining columns are zero. Explicitly, the (i, j )-th entry is: 

[Xk]ij =

(

x(i) 

> k

if j = k

0 otherwise . (B.3) 

Step 3: Reference Input Construction. Define the refer-ence input matrix containing all features except k:

X(k) = [ x1, . . . , xk−1, 0, xk+1 , . . . , xd] ∈ RN ×d. (B.4) Note that Xk + X(k) = X, the original data matrix. 

Step 4: Representation Extraction. Compute the penul-timate layer representations by passing the isolated and reference inputs through the trained network: 

Zk = fN N →L−1(Xk) ∈ RN ×dz , (B.5) 

Z(k) = fN N →L−1(X(k)) ∈ RN ×dz , (B.6) where fN N →L−1 : Rd → Rdz denotes the network mapping from input to the penultimate layer of dimension dz . Each row of Zk contains the dz -dimensional representation of the corresponding isolated input. 

Step 5: Mean Centering. Apply mean-centering to the representation matrices: 

˜Zk = MZ k, ˜Z(k) = MZ (k), (B.7) where the centering matrix is 

M = IN − 1

N 1N 1TN ∈ RN ×N , (B.8) with IN the identity matrix and 1N a vector of ones. Centering ensures that the subspaces pass through the ori-gin, required for the oblique projection to have the correct interpretation as deviation from the mean. The column spaces of ˜Zk and ˜Z(k) define the feature subspace Vk = col (˜Zk) ⊆ RN and reference subspace 

V(k) = col (˜Z(k)) ⊆ RN , respectively. 

B.2 Direct Oblique Projection Method 

Given the centered subspace bases ˜Zk and ˜Z(k) constructed above, the contribution of feature k to output j can be com-puted via direct oblique projection. Throughout, † denotes the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse. 

Orthogonal Complement Projector. First, compute the orthogonal projector onto the complement of the reference subspace V(k):

Q(k) = IN − ˜Z(k)

 ˜ZT 

> (k)

˜Z(k)

† ˜ZT

> (k)

. (B.9) The matrix Q(k) projects any vector onto the orthogonal complement of V(k), effectively removing components ex-plainable by features other than k.

Oblique Projector. The oblique projector onto Vk along 

V(k) is: 

Pk/ (k) = ˜ZkG† 

> k

˜ZTk Q(k), (B.10) where Gk = ˜ZTk Q(k) ˜Zk is the Gram matrix of the target ba-sis projected onto the complement of the reference subspace. This projector satisfies three key properties: 1) Range : Pk/ (k)v ∈ V k for all v ∈ RN

2) Identity on target : Pk/ (k)v = v for all v ∈ V k

3) Null on reference : Pk/ (k)v = 0 for all v ∈ V (k)

Contribution Computation. The contribution vector for feature k to output j is: 

ˆyk,j = Pk/ (k) ˆyj , (B.11) where ˆyj = [ˆ y(1)  

> j

, . . . , ˆy(N ) 

> j

]T ∈ RN contains the predictions for output j across all N samples. Each entry [ˆ yk,j ]i rep-resents the contribution of feature k to the prediction for sample i.SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL 4

Algorithm 1 summarizes the complete direct projection procedure. 

Algorithm 1 Direct Oblique Projection for NObSP 

Require: Trained network fN N , dataset X ∈ RN ×d, predic-tions ˆyj ∈ RN

Ensure: Contribution vectors {ˆyk,j }dk=1 

1: Normalize X to zero mean, unit variance 

2: for k = 1 to d do 

3: Construct Xk (isolated) and X(k) (reference) 

4: Zk ← fN N →L−1(Xk)

5: Z(k) ← fN N →L−1(X(k))

6: ˜Zk ← MZ k; ˜Z(k) ← MZ (k)

7: Q(k) ← I − ˜Z(k)(˜ZT 

> (k)

˜Z(k))† ˜ZT

> (k)

8: Gk ← ˜ZTk Q(k) ˜Zk

9: Pk/ (k) ← ˜ZkG† 

> k

˜ZTk Q(k)

10: ˆyk,j ← Pk/ (k) ˆyj

11: end for 

12: return {ˆyk,j }dk=1 

B.3 Computational Complexity Analysis 

The direct method has the following costs per feature k: 

> •

Representation extraction : O(TN N ) for N -sample forward pass  

> •

Centering : O(N d z ) 

> •

Computing Q(k): O(N d 2 

> z

+ d3 

> z

) 

> •

Computing Pk/ (k): O(N 2dz ) — bottleneck  

> •

Contribution : O(N 2) matrix-vector product The dominant costs are O(N 2dz ) computation and 

O(N 2) storage for Pk/ (k). For d features, total complexity is O(dN 2dz ).This motivates the efficient partial regression formu-lation (Algorithm 1 of the main text), which achieves 

O(N d 2 

> z

+ d3 

> z

) computation and O(dz ) storage per feature by avoiding explicit construction of N × N projection matrices. 

B.4 Numerical Considerations 

Several practical considerations arise in implementation: 

Regularization. When subspace bases are rank-deficient or ill-conditioned, the pseudoinverse can be unstable. Tikhonov regularization improves stability: 



AT A

†

≈



AT A + λI

−1

(B.12) with small λ > 0 (typically 10 −4 to 10 −6). The efficient partial regression method in the main text incorporates this regularization directly. 

Subspace Overlap. When Vk ∩ V (k)̸ = {0}, the oblique projector is not uniquely defined on the intersection. The pseudoinverse provides the minimum-norm solution, pro-jecting onto the portion of Vk linearly independent from 

V(k).

High-Dimensional Inputs. For d ≫ 100 features, con-structing all isolated inputs simultaneously is memory-intensive. Batch processing is recommended: construct and process features in groups. 

Sparse Activations. ReLU networks may produce many zeros in Zk, particularly for isolated inputs. This sparsity can be exploited computationally but may cause rank defi-ciency in subspace bases. 

TABLE 1 Region Deletion AUC on the full vision profile (higher is better). Values are means over 200 synchronized image samples per row. Bold marks the numerical maximum per row, not statistical significance.                                                                                                                     

> Model Dataset GradCAM GradCAM++ Eigen-CAM NObSP ResNet-18 Imagenette 0.538 0.534 0.474 0.533 ResNet-18 CIFAR-10 0.629 0.610 0.647 0.611 ResNet-18 CIFAR-100 0.738 0.742 0.768 0.746 ResNet-18 TinyImageNet 0.718 0.699 0.632 0.697 ResNet-18 STL10 0.611 0.604 0.600 0.601 ResNet-18 DermaMNIST 0.582 0.552 0.534 0.549 MobileNetV2 Imagenette 0.453 0.439 0.403 0.410 MobileNetV2 CIFAR-10 0.601 0.604 0.580 0.614
> MobileNetV2 CIFAR-100 0.765 0.754 0.740 0.758 MobileNetV2 TinyImageNet 0.659 0.659 0.635 0.656 MobileNetV2 STL10 0.527 0.515 0.492 0.513 MobileNetV2 DermaMNIST 0.553 0.550 0.533 0.535 EfficientNet-B0 Imagenette 0.444 0.432 0.372 0.424 EfficientNet-B0 CIFAR-10 0.551 0.549 0.521 0.540 EfficientNet-B0 CIFAR-100 0.721 0.719 0.693 0.723
> EfficientNet-B0 TinyImageNet 0.720 0.709 0.659 0.703 EfficientNet-B0 STL10 0.567 0.556 0.499 0.556 EfficientNet-B0 DermaMNIST 0.561 0.563 0.559 0.552 RegNetY-400MF Imagenette 0.454 0.438 0.400 0.447 RegNetY-400MF CIFAR-10 0.593 0.597 0.587 0.595 RegNetY-400MF CIFAR-100 0.718 0.703 0.702 0.702 RegNetY-400MF TinyImageNet 0.685 0.674 0.640 0.673 RegNetY-400MF STL10 0.653 0.645 0.608 0.642 RegNetY-400MF DermaMNIST 0.516 0.478 0.460 0.478

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL C: E XTENDED VISION 

RESULTS 

C.1 Region Deletion AUC on the Full Profile 

Table 1 reports Region Deletion AUC for all six datasets and four backbones (24 configurations, 200 synchronized evaluation samples each). The pattern matches the main text subset: GradCAM is strongest overall (mean 0.606 over 4,784 image and model evaluations, against 0.597 for GradCAM++, 0.594 for NObSP-CAM, and 0.572 for Eigen-CAM), with NObSP-CAM close throughout and attaining the row maximum on MobileNetV2 with CIFAR-10 and EfficientNet-B0 with CIFAR-100. 

C.2 Legacy Pixel Level Faithfulness Correlation 

Earlier versions of this evaluation used the Quantus Faith-fulness Correlation metric, which perturbs individual pix-els and correlates attribution with the resulting prediction change. Table 2 reproduces those results for transparency. All methods score near zero on this metric because pixel level perturbation is mismatched to the spatial granularity of class activation maps, which are produced at the resolu-tion of the final convolutional feature map and upsampled. This mismatch motivated the region level protocol adopted in the main text: Region Deletion AUC perturbs contiguous patches at a scale commensurate with CAM resolution. 

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL D: E XTENDED TABU -

LAR RESULTS 

D.1 Per Feature Function Reproduction Scores 

Table 3 reports the direct FRS R 2 of each method on each nonzero component of the synthetic additive benchmark, together with the mean absolute attribution on the null feature. NObSP attains the highest recovery on every com-ponent, with the largest margins on the cubic and sinusoidal SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL 5                                                                                          

> TABLE 2 Legacy Faithfulness Correlation on vision benchmarks (synchronized subsets of 20–50 images per row). All methods score near zero; see the text of this section. Model 1 is ResNet-18, model 2 is EfficientNet-B0, and model 3 is RegNetY-400MF.
> Model Dataset GradCAM GradCAM++ Eigen-CAM NObSP 1CIFAR-10 0.041 0.048 0.021 0.011 TinyImageNet -0.004 -0.002 -0.035 0.023 DermaMNIST 0.040 0.032 0.010 0.023 2CIFAR-10 0.037 0.039 0.030 0.010 TinyImageNet 0.058 0.069 0.025 0.060 DermaMNIST -0.016 -0.035 -0.020 -0.036 3CIFAR-10 0.007 0.012 0.026 0.050 TinyImageNet -0.018 0.014 0.022 -0.028 DermaMNIST 0.057 0.025 0.019 0.058
> TABLE 3 Per feature direct FRS R 2(higher is better) and null feature mean absolute attribution (lower is better) on the synthetic additive benchmark, mean ±SD over seeds 0–2. Bold marks the numerical best per row.
> Component NObSP KernelSHAP IG
> |x1|0.985 ±0.003 0.974 ±0.004 0.933 ±0.006
> x320.986 ±0.002 0.952 ±0.004 0.839 ±0.036
> ex30.999 ±0.001 0.995 ±0.001 0.984 ±0.003
> sin(2 x4)0.987 ±0.005 0.941 ±0.007 0.932 ±0.005 Null x5(abs.) 0.009 ±0.003 0.014 ±0.001 0.022 ±0.003

components; Integrated Gradients degrades most on the cubic component. 

D.2 Local Conditional Pairwise Delta Agreement 

For real datasets, ground truth component functions are unavailable. As a diagnostic companion, we introduce a local conditional pairwise delta agreement (LCPDA) analy-sis, inspired by local fidelity and infidelity style evaluation. For pairs of test samples that share the predicted class (classification only), differ in one feature by at least the median nonzero delta, and are close in all other features (15th percentile distance threshold, at most 800 pairs per feature), we compare the model output delta with the expla-nation delta assigned to that feature, and report the Pearson correlation and normalized RMSE between the two across pairs. NObSP is calibrated on the training split (up to 1,000 samples); Integrated Gradients uses a mean baseline with 32 steps; KernelSHAP uses 40 background samples and 100 coalition samples. Values are mean ± SD over model seeds 0–2. LCPDA is not a standard benchmark metric, and we do not use it as evidence of superiority. Results are mixed (Table 4): by Pearson agreement, NObSP is strongest on Iris and Breast Cancer, Integrated Gradients ties KernelSHAP on Adult, and KernelSHAP is strongest on Wine, German Credit, Bank Marketing, Covertype, Diabetes, and Califor-nia Housing. We report it alongside the standard metrics and the synthetic ground truth FRS for transparency. SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL 6

TABLE 4 LCPDA on real tabular datasets: Pearson correlation between model output deltas and explanation deltas (higher is better) and normalized RMSE (lower is better), mean ± SD over seeds 0–2. Bold marks the numerical best per row and metric. 

Pearson ↑ NRMSE ↓

Dataset NObSP IG KSHAP NObSP IG KSHAP Iris 0.503 ± 0.020 0.429 ± 0.025 0.484 ± 0.024 0.867 ± 0.013 0.935 ± 0.033 0.881 ± 0.021 Wine 0.254 ± 0.016 0.228 ± 0.012 0.275 ± 0.009 0.976 ± 0.002 0.992 ± 0.009 0.970 ± 0.004 

Breast Cancer 0.434 ± 0.017 0.401 ± 0.014 0.396 ± 0.008 0.938 ± 0.004 0.933 ± 0.008 0.947 ± 0.007 Adult 0.629 ± 0.035 0.862 ± 0.027 0.862 ± 0.026 0.787 ± 0.027 0.509 ± 0.041 0.522 ± 0.037 German Credit 0.204 ± 0.012 0.216 ± 0.013 0.259 ± 0.006 0.983 ± 0.003 0.999 ± 0.004 0.968 ± 0.001 

Bank Marketing 0.417 ± 0.020 0.434 ± 0.031 0.522 ± 0.023 0.938 ± 0.027 0.945 ± 0.029 0.869 ± 0.013 

Covertype 0.297 ± 0.015 0.313 ± 0.029 0.384 ± 0.029 1.032 ± 0.032 1.088 ± 0.031 0.947 ± 0.018 

Diabetes 0.519 ± 0.165 0.630 ± 0.002 0.658 ± 0.004 0.951 ± 0.266 0.777 ± 0.002 0.765 ± 0.002 

California Housing 0.668 ± 0.081 0.600 ± 0.010 0.745 ± 0.038 0.772 ± 0.082 0.948 ± 0.006 0.700 ± 0.038