Title: GFGE: Unifying Explainable AI Methods through an Interpretation Framework

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2610.05225v1

Published Time: Tue, 06 Oct 2026 01:40:13 GMT

Number of Pages: 32

Markdown Content:
# GFGE: Unifying Explainable AI Methods through an Interpretation Framework 

Jinfeng Zhong 1

LIASD, Université Paris 8, 93200 Saint-Denis, France 

jinfeng.zhong@univ-paris8.fr 

Abstract. Explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) encompasses meth-ods that draw on different sources of information and address different explanatory needs. A common framework is needed to describe how this information becomes evidence and is communicated as an explanation for a particular recipient. We propose the General Framework for Generating Explanations (GFGE), grounded in interpretative frameworks and the complementary activities of sense-reading and sense-giving . Its concep-tual foundation is the Interpret/Explain Schema (IES), which connects an analyst’s interpretation of system evidence, the communication of a selected account, and the recipient’s interpretation of that account. GFGE operationalises this schema through five roles: data interpretation, model interpretation, output interpretation, optional post-hoc analysis, and aggregation. A role-typed operation graph records method-specific dependencies, while evidence records retain the sources, assumptions, and limitations of explanatory claims. The explanatory question, audience, and context guide the procedure. We instantiate GFGE for attribution, surrogate, counterfactual, concept and prototype, intrinsic rule, argu-mentation, and language-model methods. These instantiations show how intrinsic, post-hoc, and hybrid workflows can be represented through the same roles while preserving their distinct evidential requirements. GFGE provides a common basis for analysing explanation workflows, tracing communicated claims to their evidence, and identifying unresolved explanatory dependencies. 

Keywords: Explainable artificial intelligence · Interpretation framework · Explanation generation · Counterfactual explanations 

## 1 Introduction 

AI systems increasingly influence decisions that directly affect individuals, yet users often struggle to understand why these systems behave as they do. Consider a loan applicant who receives a rejection from an automated credit-scoring system, or a patient who is told that a clinical model predicts a high risk of disease. In such situations, people do not only want to know what the system decided but also why the decision was made, whether it is fair, and what could be changed to obtain a different outcome. These examples reveal a practical tension: although modern predictive models achieve high accuracy, their internal reasoning is not arXiv:2610.05225v1 [cs.AI] 4 Oct 2026 2 Zhong 

immediately interpretable, and existing explanation techniques draw on different evidence and answer different questions. A shared account must preserve these differences while showing how each technique contributes to an explanation for its intended audience. As AI-based decision support becomes increasingly embedded across domains such as healthcare, finance, transportation, and online services, questions of transparency, accountability, and trustworthiness have become central to their design and deployment [47, 57, 67]. Users, developers, and regulators now expect AI systems not only to deliver accurate predictions but also to justify their outputs in meaningful and understandable ways. This demand is reinforced by legal and ethical frameworks, including the GDPR and the EU AI Act. Their transparency and oversight requirements depend on the application context; they do not require the same explanatory artefact for every AI output [24, 68]. Yet despite broad agreement on the importance of explanations, the concepts of interpretability and explainability remain remarkably fragmented. Existing literature provides divergent definitions: some works attempt to distinguish interpretability from explainability [21, 38, 48], while others use the terms in-terchangeably [6, 44, 47]. These usages are often rooted in discipline-specific intuition rather than shared principles, leading to terminological ambiguity across computer science, philosophy, and cognitive science. This lack of conceptual clarity complicates the formulation of rigorous research questions, obscures the relationships among explanatory methods, and limits our ability to evaluate and compare explainable AI (XAI) systems in a coherent manner. Our primary aim is to unify the generation of explanations across heteroge-neous XAI methods. To that end, this paper makes four contributions. 

(1) A conceptual distinction between interpretation and expla-nation. Drawing on linguistic analysis, philosophy of explanation, cognitive science, and knowledge management, we disentangle the notions of interpretation (sense-reading) and explanation (sense-giving). We give working definitions that distinguish a person’s act of making sense from a computational operation that extracts candidate evidence. Explanatory questions include why, why-not, what-if, how-to, and global-pattern questions. 

(2) The Interpret/Explain Schema (IES) for AI systems. Building on these definitions, we propose a schema that characterises how interpretation and explanation emerge within the data–model–output pipeline of an AI system. The IES clarifies the flow of information between developers, systems, and end-users, operationalising abstract conceptual distinctions into a computational structure. 

(3) The General Framework for Generating Explanations (GFGE). 

We introduce GFGE, a modular and model-agnostic framework that instantiates the IES as a role-typed operation graph for describing explanation generation. GFGE is parameterised by components for data interpretation, model interpre-tation, output interpretation, post-hoc interpretation, and aggregation. Unlike many existing explanation methods, GFGE is not tied to any specific model fam-ily (e.g., linear models, trees, neural networks) or any specific post-hoc technique (e.g., LIME or SHAP). Instead, these components function as interchangeable GFGE: A Framework for XAI Methods 3

modules, making GFGE compatible with both intrinsic and post-hoc explanation paradigms. 

(4) Cross-family instantiation and analysis. To examine the descriptive scope of GFGE, we instantiate it with a diverse range of explanation paradigms: post-hoc attribution techniques (e.g., LIME, SHAP), methods built upon attri-bution models (e.g., SHAP-guided counterfactuals, recourse methods), surrogate-based explanations, prototype and concept-based approaches, and intrinsically interpretable techniques such as argumentation-based models and language-model explanations [1, 15, 16, 41, 50, 55, 75, 77]. A comparative table specifies the GFGE roles used by each family, including hybrid procedures that combine several operations. We then test the mapping rules on three boundary cases and compare what two nearby frameworks and GFGE record for the same methods. This is a conceptual framework paper supported by a structured, purposive review and author-coded method analyses. The comparison tests descriptive expressiveness, not the empirical quality of generated explanations. 

## 2 Literature Review 

This section reviews existing work on explanation in AI with the specific goal of identifying conceptual and structural gaps that motivate the definitions and framework proposed in this paper. 

Review Scope and Selection. This is a structured narrative review, not a sys-tematic or exhaustive survey. We selected work that (i) defines interpretation or explanation, (ii) offers cross-method taxonomy, stakeholder, or selection frame-works, or (iii) provides a method whose evidence flow creates a boundary case for GFGE. For the framework comparison, we use the broad method-trait taxonomy of Schwalbe and Finzel [58] and the stakeholder/lifecycle roadmap of Wang et al. [72]; the other reviews in Table 1 provide context. For the boundary analysis, we use an external concept model, a perturbation reliability method, and an LLM explanation method, covering model access, evidence quality, and communication, respectively. These cases were chosen for conceptual diversity, not by random sampling. The literature set cannot support prevalence claims or comprehensive coverage of XAI. 

2.1 A General View 

As AI systems are increasingly deployed across a wide range of applications, their decisions are expected to be not only accurate but also intelligible to various stakeholders [47, 57, 67]. This expectation has led to a growing body of work on explainable artificial intelligence (XAI), addressing transparency, accountability, and trust in algorithmic decision-making. Despite this growing attention, the terminology surrounding interpretabil-ity and explainability remains inconsistent. Some authors explicitly distinguish 4 Zhong 

between the two notions [21, 38, 48], while others use them interchangeably or treat the distinction as secondary [6, 9, 22, 44, 47]. These differences are often grounded in discipline-specific intuitions rather than shared theoretical principles [44]. As a result, key terms are used with varying meanings across the literature, which complicates the formulation, comparison, and evaluation of explanation methods. This lack of conceptual clarity motivates a closer examination of how in-terpretability and explainability are defined and related, and how they are operationalised within AI systems. 

2.2 To Explain or to Interpret? 

The relationship between interpretability and explainability has been discussed extensively, yet no consensus has emerged. Three broad positions can be identified in the literature. A first line of work treats interpretability as a prerequisite for explainability, arguing that models whose internal mechanisms are transparent can explain their outputs by default [29, 38, 45, 48, 56]. In this view, interpretation primarily concerns understanding how a model operates, while explanation concerns why a particular result was produced. A second position reverses this implication, suggesting that explainable models are interpretable by default, but not all interpretable models yield valid explana-tions [28]. Here, the emphasis is placed on the justification and correctness of explanations, often with a causal interpretation. A third line of work uses the terms interpretability and explainability in-terchangeably, particularly in survey and applied contexts [6, 44, 47]. In these works, interpretability may refer either to model transparency or to the ability to explain individual predictions. Taken together, these positions show that existing distinctions are neither uniform nor systematically grounded, which limits their usefulness for structuring explanation methods across models and application contexts. 

2.3 Explanation: What? 

The notion of explanation has been studied long before the advent of AI, notably in philosophy, cognitive science, and social psychology. Philosophical accounts emphasise causal structure [33, 37], while cognitive and social perspectives stress the communicative and interactional nature of explanations [39, 42, 44]. Across these traditions, explanations are commonly understood as having a dual nature: they are both a process —involving the construction and selection of relevant information—and a product that addresses an explanatory question. The question may request a reason, a contrast, a hypothetical outcome, a feasible change, or a global pattern. Importantly, explanations are not purely objective artefacts, but are shaped by the beliefs, expectations, and background knowledge of their recipients. GFGE: A Framework for XAI Methods 5  

> System evidence Analyst
> Interpretative framework
> Communicated account Recipient
> Interpretative framework
> Sense-reading Sense-giving Sense-reading
> The recipient’s interpretation may differ from the analyst’s intended meaning.

Fig. 1. An analyst reads evidence through an interpretative framework, gives an account to a recipient, and the recipient reads that account through a different framework. This is our conceptual illustration of sense-reading and sense-giving [5, 20]. 

These insights align with concepts from knowledge management, where ex-planation emerges from the interaction between sense-reading (interpreting information through an individual mental model) and sense-giving (assigning meaning for others) [5, 20]. As illustrated in Figure 1, interpretation is inherently subjective, while explanation is fundamentally relational and communicative. This distinction provides a conceptual basis for separating interpretation and explanation in AI systems, and directly motivates the Interpret/Explain Schema introduced in Section 4. 

2.4 Explanation: Why? 

The motivations for explanation in AI have been extensively discussed in the literature [6, 30, 38]. These motivations can be broadly grouped into commercial, regulatory, and technical considerations [74]. While these drivers explain why explanations are desirable, they do not, by themselves, specify how explanations should be structured, nor how different stakeholders’ needs should be aligned within an AI system. As such, they motivate the need for explanation frameworks, but do not resolve the conceptual and structural ambiguities identified above. 

2.5 Explanation: How? 

Existing work on explanation methods is commonly organised around a small set of taxonomic distinctions [29, 38]. A first distinction separates model-intrinsic 

approaches, which rely on transparent model structures, from post-hoc approaches, which extract explanatory information from otherwise opaque models. Post-hoc methods are further categorised along axes such as local vs. global scope, and model-specific vs. model-agnostic applicability. These distinctions are useful for comparing techniques; richer frameworks also encode mechanisms, model access, stakeholders, and interaction [58, 72]. Their published categories do not, however, require a single record that links each evidence source to its transformation and to the analyst–recipient transition. Hybrid approaches—such as attribution-guided counterfactuals or concept-based models combined with post-hoc analysis—can carry several valid taxonomic 6 Zhong 

labels. The question here is how to record their ordered operations and assump-tions alongside those labels. This limitation motivates the need for a framework that captures explanation generation as a structured process rather than as a static category. 

2.6 Explanation: How to Evaluate? 

Evaluation strategies for explanations in AI are commonly classified into application-grounded, human-grounded, and functionally-grounded approaches [21]. These strategies address different aspects of explanation quality, including usefulness, human understanding, and fidelity to the underlying model. Importantly, these evaluation frameworks assess how good an explanation is, but do not specify how explanations are structurally generated . This distinction is central to this paper: the framework proposed in the following sections focuses on the structure and expressiveness of explanation pipelines, while remaining compatible with existing evaluation methodologies. 

2.7 Related Surveys and the Role of GFGE 

Recent reviews give increasingly precise ways to organise XAI, and thus provide an important test of the contribution claimed here. Schwalbe and Finzel’s survey of surveys offers a detailed taxonomy of method properties [58]. Wang et al. connect stakeholder questions to methods across an AI system’s lifecycle [72]. More recent taxonomies support developers’ technique selection or distinguish mechanisms and levels of interpretability [17, 23]. Human-centred reviews instead organise design goals and evaluation evidence [43]; the LLM-specific review by Cai et al. concentrates on whether interpretability enables interventions and model improvement [12]. Table 1 compares these contributions with the question GFGE addresses. The comparison does not imply that taxonomies omit stakeholders or that GFGE replaces user-centred evaluation. Rather, the proposed contribution is an explicit procedural mapping grounded in the IES: a method is described by the roles it instantiates, the evidence it transfers between them, and the transition from analyst sense-reading to recipient-oriented sense-giving. 

2.8 Summary and Identified Gap 

The literature reviewed in this section shows that explainable AI has been studied extensively, yet through several lines of work that remain only weakly connected. In particular, existing works provide complementary contributions: 

– Taxonomies of XAI methods , which organise techniques along axes such as intrinsic vs. post-hoc, local vs. global, or model-specific vs. model-agnostic [6, 29, 47]; GFGE: A Framework for XAI Methods 7

Table 1. Scope of related XAI reviews and the complementary role of GFGE.     

> Review Primary organising question GFGE’s distinct analytical question
> Schwalbe and Finzel [58] Which properties distinguish methods and guide their selection? Which interpretative operations and information flows generate a particular explanation? Wang et al. [72] Which stakeholders need which explanations at which lifecycle stage? How does a selected method transform data, model, and output evidence into an account for that stakeholder? Cousineau and Dara [17]; Elsayed et al. [23] How should techniques be classified or selected by mechanism and interpretability level? How are intrinsic, post-hoc, and hybrid techniques instantiated in the same modular procedure? Mangold et al. [43] How should XAI systems be designed and evaluated with human users? Which generation steps precede that evaluation, and where does recipient interpretation enter? Cai et al. [12] How can LLM interpretability support intervention and model improvement? How do internal evidence, intervention tests, and communicated explanations fit into a framework spanning model families?

– Informal or discipline-specific definitions of interpretability and ex-plainability, typically grounded in philosophical, psychological, or technical intuitions [21, 38, 44]; 

– Evaluation frameworks , which propose strategies to assess explanation quality (e.g., application-grounded, human-grounded, and functionally-grounded evaluation) [21, 31, 46]. These literatures already model method mechanisms, stakeholders, evaluation, and interaction in substantial detail. The narrower gap pursued here is a common representation that jointly records evidence provenance, the order of interpretative operations, and the transition from an analyst’s findings to a recipient-facing account. Hybrid procedures make the need for such a record especially visible. The reviewed approaches address parts of this problem. Their emphases differ from the combination developed here: 1. Working definitions of interpretability and explainability grounded in a distinction between sense-reading and sense-giving ;2. A system-level schema that explicitly models the roles of different stake-holders (e.g., developers vs. end-users) and links their interpretations of data, models, and outputs within the same AI pipeline; 3. A general procedural framework that represents explanation generation as a structured workflow and can encode heterogeneous explanation families— including intrinsic, post-hoc, and hybrid approaches—within a single, modular structure. GFGE’s target is the link between these levels: how interpretation and expla-nation jointly arise in an AI system and how methods with different technical 8 Zhong 

mechanisms can be expressed within one procedure across stakeholders. A map-ping at this level complements method selection and evaluation; it does not establish that a mapped explanation is faithful or understood. Addressing this gap is the objective of the next section, which introduces general definitions of interpretability and explainability, followed by the Interpret/Explain Schema (IES) and the General Framework for Generating Explanations (GFGE). 

## 3 Interpretation and Explanation: Conceptual Basis 

Explanation in AI draws on several traditions. Causal accounts ask what brought about an outcome, whereas social and cognitive accounts ask how an account an-swers a person’s question in context [33, 37, 39, 42, 44]. Both matter here: a claim about model behaviour may require causal evidence, while its communication must still be intelligible to its intended recipient. Knowledge-management work distinguishes sense-reading , the interpreta-tion of received information, from sense-giving , the assignment of meaning to information conveyed to others [5, 20]. Individuals read information through interpretative frameworks [32] or mental models [65]. Consequently, two people may derive different meanings from the same display. Figure 1 introduces this interaction; it is the conceptual basis of the IES and GFGE. 

Definition 1. Interpretability is the degree to which an observer can derive a meaningful understanding from an event, representation, model, or account. 

Definition 2. Explainability is the capacity to construct and communicate an account intended to make an event or outcome understandable, including its reasons or causes when those claims are warranted. 

These definitions assign different roles to the acts, not disjoint labels to AI systems. An analyst may interpret data or model behaviour before producing an explanation; a recipient subsequently interprets that explanation. Sense-giving does not guarantee successful sense-reading. Likewise, an account of association is not automatically a causal account. The IES locates these acts in an AI system, and GFGE identifies the operations that can connect them. These are conceptual, observer-relative working definitions rather than mea-surement scales. In particular, “meaningful” and “understandable” depend on a person’s task and background knowledge. The names of GFGE’s Interpret... 

modules denote computational extraction or organisation of candidate evidence .Running such a module is not itself a person’s cognitive interpretation. Whether the output becomes meaningful to an analyst or recipient requires separate observation and evaluation. 

## 4 Interpret/Explain Schema for AI Systems 

Building on the definitions established in Section 3, this section examines how interpretation and explanation materialise within an AI system. By analysing the GFGE: A Framework for XAI Methods 9          

> AI SYSTEM
> Input data xModel MOutput y
> Information available to the analyst
> Data semantics ·model structure ·output behaviour
> Analyst
> Interpretative framework
> Sense-reading
> Explanation interface
> Selected account
> Sense-giving
> Recipient
> Interpretative framework
> Sense-reading
> interpret Computation / communication Information access

Fig. 2. Interpretation and explanation in an AI system. The analyst reads information from data, model, and output; an interface conveys an account to the recipient, who interprets it through their own mental model. Solid arrows denote computation or communication; dashed arrows denote information access. 

flow of information between developers, models, data, and users, we introduce an Interpret/Explain Schema (IES) that characterises the roles of sense-reading and sense-giving in computational settings. This schema then motivates the design of a General Framework for Generating Explanations (GFGE), presented in Section 4.4, which provides a model-agnostic representation of explanation workflows across AI applications. 

4.1 AI: To Interpret or to Explain? 

An AI system connects input data, a model, and its output, as shown in Figure 2. An analyst—for example, a developer, domain specialist, or auditor—interprets information available from each component through an interpretative framework. This is sense-reading [32, 65]. Selecting and presenting some of that information through an interface is sense-giving ; a recipient then interprets the account through their own mental model [5, 44]. The IES thus locates explanation in the interaction between evidence, its presentation, and recipient interpretation. The recipient’s understanding is an empirical question, not an automatic consequence of making model information visible. 

4.2 Definitions in the Context of AI 

The IES distinguishes what information an analyst can inspect from what a recipient can understand. Applying Definitions 1 and 2 yields five system-level capacities. 10 Zhong 

Definition 3. Interpretability of data is the degree to which an observer can assign meaning to input features, their measurements, and their constraints. 

Definition 4. Interpretability of a model is the degree to which an observer can understand the model structures or mechanisms relevant to a question. 

Definition 5. Explainability of a result is the capacity to construct an account of a model output for a specified question and audience. 

Definition 6. Post-hoc interpretability is the capacity to derive information about a trained model or its behaviour using an additional analytic method. 

Definition 7. Interpretability of an explanation is the degree to which a recipient can understand the communicated account in the relevant context. 

The first, second, and fourth capacities primarily concern evidence available to the analyst; the fifth concerns a recipient’s sense-reading. The third connects them through sense-giving. A post-hoc method may be useful even when inter-nal model structure is available, and an intrinsically interpretable model still needs its relevant result communicated. These definitions describe capacities, not guarantees of fidelity, causal validity, or user benefit. Those properties require separate evaluation [21, 51]. 

4.3 Discussion: Stakeholders and Explanatory Needs 

A developer may inspect data quality or model structure, a domain expert may ask whether a prediction accords with domain knowledge, and an affected user may ask why an outcome occurred or what could change it. The same system can therefore support several explanation questions and audiences. The IES marks the point at which the analyst’s interpretation becomes an account offered to another person; GFGE will make the operations behind that point explicit. The reasons for explaining include debugging, accountability, appropriate reliance, and decision support [6, 74]. Whether an intrinsic model or a post-hoc method is suitable depends on the question, the available evidence, and the consequences of error [14, 56]. Neither a transparent model nor a plausible post-hoc artefact automatically satisfies the recipient’s need. This motivates a framework that can represent both sources of evidence and the communication step in one procedure. 

4.4 General Framework for Generating Explanations 

Building upon the Interpret/Explain Schema (IES) introduced in Figure 2 and the definitions formalised in Section 4.2, we now propose a General Framework for Generating Explanations (GFGE). The purpose of GFGE is to operationalise the IES by providing a modular representation of explanation procedures in AI systems. In line with the IES, an analyst interprets information from data, model structure, and outputs, then selects findings relevant to a recipient’s question [21, 44]. GFGE: A Framework for XAI Methods 11 

Novelty and Motivation. GFGE specifies roles rather than prescribing a model family or explainer. Its modules can therefore be instantiated by a rule list, a tree ensemble, a neural model, or a combination of intrinsic and post-hoc operations. This modularity is the basis for the unification claim developed in Section 5; the actual evidence available still depends on the model, data, and method. 

Inputs of the Framework. GFGE takes as input the following components, each corresponding to specific forms of sense-reading or sense-giving as depicted in Figure 1: 

– M: the model in deployment. 

– D: the input instance or collection whose model behaviour is to be explained. 

– P: a preprocessing function that prepares the data for M.

– q, u, and c: the question, audience, and context. Context includes permitted changes and domain assumptions. 

– InterpretData : interprets information from D, corresponding to the inter-pretability of data in Definition 3. InterpretData denotes the data-facing evidential role; domain or feasibility constraints supplied through c may originate from external knowledge and are not assumed to be learned from 

D.

– InterpretModel : interprets information from M, corresponding to model interpretability in Definition 4. 

– InterpretOutput : extracts evidence about observed or queried outputs of 

M; it does not define the desired target in q.

– PostHocInterpretation : when needed, extracts additional evidence from model behaviour, for example by fitting a LIME surrogate [55] or computing SHAP attributions [41]. It is optional for an intrinsically interpretable model. 

– Aggregation : selects and communicates already recorded claims for q and u,without silently adding new evidential claims. 

Evidence Records and Role Assignment. Let q = ( t, τ, κ, γ ) identify question type 

t ∈ Tq , target τ , contrast κ, and requested constraints γ, where Tq may include why, why-not, what-if, how-to, and global-pattern questions; these examples are not exhaustive. A proposed outcome is part of q, whereas observing whether the model produces it is an output operation. Let ri = ( si, p i, k i, π i, σ i, a i, ℓ i) record each candidate claim ki, its source si, producing operation pi, parent-record identifiers πi, scope σi, assumptions ai, and limitations ℓi. The parent identifiers expose which earlier claims a later analysis consumes. The first four modules return sets of such records; A returns a selected account e. The communicated claims in e retain links to the corresponding records in r. Table 2 is the coding contract used below. These are operation roles, not mutually exclusive method labels. Split a multi-step method at the point where provenance changes; for example, reading forest leaves is IM, searching their regions is PH, and checking each candidate prediction is IO. A role is inactive only if no claim needed to answer q requires it; a missing necessary source is marked unresolved , not silently treated as inactive. 12 Zhong 

Table 2. GFGE module contracts. E0 = ED ∪ EM ∪ EO and E = E0 ∪ EH denote available records; q specifies the target. 

Role Input → output Necessary assignment condition Exclude and assign elsewhere 

ID (D, z, c, q ) → ED Extracts feature meaning, measurement, domain constraints, or feasible changes. Desired outcome belongs to 

q; a model response belongs to IO. IM (M, z, q ) → EM Directly reads a mechanism, parameter, rule, leaf, prototype, or circuit actually used by the predictor. A fitted surrogate or attribution computation belongs to PH, even if model internals accelerate it. IO (y, M, z, q ) → EO Records observed predictions, scores, or queried contrasts produced by M.The requested alternative is in q; searching for inputs that attain it belongs to PH. PH (M, z, y, q, E 0) →

EH

Runs an additional explanatory analysis: perturbation, attribution, surrogate fitting, intervention test, or candidate search. Simply reading an existing model rule is IM; wording an existing claim is A. A (E, q, u ) → e Selects, orders, and renders supported claims with provenance for audience u.Any new model query, statistical estimate, or factual inference must be recorded in IO, PH, ID, or IM first. 

The analyst may interpret these records; computing them does not establish human understanding. Audience u enters selection and rendering in A, while evidence extraction is held fixed for a given q and c. A recipient’s follow-up can change q or c and trigger a new pass. This choice makes audience dependence explicit and consistent. 

The Framework. Figure 3 depicts the information flow from the IES to GFGE: the three system sources feed interpretation modules, optional post-hoc analysis contributes further evidence, and aggregation selects an account for the question and audience. Algorithm 1 illustrates the common single-pass case and is not the general semantics of GFGE. The general representation is the operation graph in Equation 1, whose edges determine method-specific dependencies; a valid graph may place PH before IM or contain repeated roles. GFGE: A Framework for XAI Methods 13 

a Evidence, communication and recipient feedback AI system 

Input x P

−→ z M

−−→ Output y

Question q

Context c

Roles used to label operations in Gf

> Roles may repeat; dependencies are method-specific (panel b).

ID Data 

Semantics and constraints 

IM Model 

Predictor mechanisms 

IO Output 

Actual model responses 

PH Post-hoc 

Additional analysis 

Evidence record r Unresolved gaps retained 

Source s · operation p · claim k · parent records π

Scope σ · assumptions a · limitations ℓ

A Aggregation 

Select for q, u and communicate supported claims Sense-giving 

Audience u

Needs and background 

Explanation artefact e

Selected, traceable claims 

Recipient 

Sense-reading    

> Recipient feedback ft
> updates q, c
> Evidence / communication Context / audience / feedback

b Selected dependency paths Partial paths; other roles omitted 

CBM-zero PH 

Construct concept map 

IM 

Inspect converted predictor 

SHAP-guided counterfactual PH 

Attribution 

PH 

Search 

IO 

Responses 

Fig. 3. GFGE roles, evidence, and communication. (a) Computational operations supply evidence for analyst sense-reading; aggregation performs sense-giving, followed by recipient sense-reading. The role panel lists the vocabulary of Gf , without imposing an execution order. Solid arrows denote evidence or communication; dashed arrows denote contextual inputs or feedback. (b) Selected dependency paths show PH before IM in CBM-zero and repeated PH operations in attribution-guided counterfactuals [71, 76]. These paths omit other roles. 14 Zhong 

Algorithm 1: Canonical single-pass instantiation of GFGE                                                          

> Input: Model M; data D; preprocessing P; question q; audience u; context c;implemented modules ID, I M, I O, H, A
> Output: Explanation artefact eand an evidence record
> 1z← P (D);y← M (z)
> 2d←ID(D, z, c, q )
> 3m←IM(M, z, q )
> 4o←IO(y, M, z, q )
> 5h←∅
> 6if additional post-hoc evidence is needed then
> 7h←H(M, z, y, q, d, m, o )
> 8E←d∪m∪o∪h
> 9r←Record( E)
> 10 e←A(E, q, u )
> 11 return (e, r )

The present formulation treats a model interaction or generated trace as an output y. Richer sequential or agentic systems may require repeated GFGE passes or an extension of the output representation. Here ID, IM , IO, H, and A instantiate InterpretData , InterpretModel ,

InterpretOutput , PostHocInterpretation , and Aggregation , respectively. The record r retains the source, scope, assumptions, and limitations of the findings used to construct e. This is a workflow template: it does not compute an explanation until a method supplies the modules, their data access, and their de-cision rules. The displayed order is illustrative only; method-specific dependency order is represented by Gf in Equation 1. A recipient can supply feedback ft

after round t; an interaction policy then updates (qt+1 , c t+1 ) = U (qt, c t, f t) and reruns the relevant modules. The policy U is application-specific, and recipient understanding remains an empirical matter. 

Relation to Existing Explanation Taxonomies. GFGE provides a unifying lens through which standard distinctions can be reinterpreted: 

– Model-intrinsic vs post-hoc. An intrinsic method can expose prediction-relevant structure in IM and outcomes in IO. A post-hoc method records its additional analysis in PH; this remains true when model internals are also available. 

– Local vs global. Scope is determined by the explanatory question and evidence examined. LIME is typically local, whereas aggregating local attri-butions across a dataset can support a global analysis [41, 55]. 

– Model-specific vs model-agnostic. This distinction concerns module implementation. TreeSHAP exploits tree structure, while a model-agnostic explainer can use input–output queries [40, 55]. 

Summary. GFGE is an operational instantiation of the IES: it encodes the schema’s information sources and stakeholder transition as modular roles. Its GFGE: A Framework for XAI Methods 15 

generality lies in allowing those roles to be populated by different techniques, from intrinsic model inspection to post-hoc querying. The mapping in Section 5 examines the scope of that claim. 

Structural Expressiveness. For a method f and a question–audience–context tuple (q, u, c ), define its GFGE representation as a role-typed operation graph and evidence record: 

Φ(f ; q, u, c ) = ( Gf , r ), Gf = ( Vf , E f ), λ : Vf → { ID, IM, IO, P H, A }.

(1) Here, role-typed denotes role labels constrained by assignment rules; it does not imply a formal type system for checking composition. Each node is an operation assigned one role by the contracts in Table 2; an edge (vi, v j ) means that vj

consumes evidence from vi. The parent identifiers πi make this dependency explicit at claim level. A method may repeat a role in multiple nodes, and a role may be inactive under the rule above. GFGE represents a procedure within its stated scope 

only when every claim required by the declared evidential requirements for q and 

c can be assigned a source and operation, dependencies can be ordered, and A can link communicated claims back to evidence. These requirements must be specified for the application; GFGE checks their procedural coverage without providing an independent criterion for epistemic or semantic completeness. A mapping fails or remains partial if, for example, a human’s unstated domain judgment supplies a claim without a recorded source, an interactive method changes goals without a representable context update, or the only available artefact is an untraceable generated rationale. These cases are recorded as unresolved rather than forced into PH or A. The structural scope claim can be challenged by methods whose required operations cannot be assigned to the defined roles; low agreement among independent coders would instead challenge the operational reproducibility of the coding contract. Structural fit does not establish correctness, fidelity, understanding, or usefulness. 

Relation to Evaluation and Explanation Quality. By design, GFGE does not define or optimise explanation quality. Quality criteria such as fidelity, useful-ness, trustworthiness, actionability, or human understanding depend on the target audience and application context. These aspects are addressed through evaluation strategies discussed in Section 2.6, including application-grounded, human-grounded, and functionally-grounded evaluation. GFGE provides the structural substrate upon which such evaluations can be systematically applied, by clarifying which components of the explanation pipeline are responsible for which explanatory roles. 

4.5 Discussion 

The XAI-Specific Contribution of GFGE. GFGE specialises provenance, dataflow, workflow, and evidence representations through five joint commitments: (i) an XAI role vocabulary that distinguishes data semantics, predictive mechanisms, 16 Zhong 

observed outputs, additional explanatory analysis, and communication; (ii) the explanatory question q, recipient u, and context c that determine which claims an account must support; (iii) the IES transition from analyst sense-reading to recipient-oriented sense-giving and subsequent recipient sense-reading; (iv) provenance, assumptions, and limitations attached to individual explanatory claims; and (v) explicit records of unresolved explanatory dependencies. Together, these commitments connect the flow of computational evidence to the conditions under which it can support a particular explanatory account. For example, a counterfactual may have fully traceable search provenance while lacking the feasibility evidence needed to answer a how-to question. GFGE makes that missing explanatory dependency part of the representation. Its contribution is this common representational contract for XAI workflows; the graph structure itself is not claimed as a new formalism. 

What GFGE Enables Beyond Existing Taxonomies. XAI surveys and taxonomies (e.g., intrinsic vs. post-hoc, local vs. global, model-specific vs. model-agnostic) provide valuable descriptive axes for categorising explanation methods. These axes and newer mechanism-based taxonomies [23, 58] describe important method properties, but a category alone does not specify the full procedural workflow 

through which evidence becomes an account for a stakeholder. The Interpret/Explain Schema (IES) and the General Framework for Generat-ing Explanations (GFGE) go beyond such classifications by explicitly modelling explanations as stakeholder-mediated pipelines grounded in sense-reading and sense-giving. In particular, GFGE specifies a procedural contract : an analy-sis of an explanation method should state (i) how data are rendered mean-ingful ( InterpretData ), (ii) what information is available from the model (InterpretModel ), (iii) how outputs are interpreted ( InterpretOutput ), (iv) whether post-hoc interpretation is required, and (v) how these elements are aggre-gated into a communicative explanation for the intended recipient ( Aggregation ). A role can be inactive, but that decision should be explicit. This procedural view supports analyses that a taxonomic label alone does not specify. First, GFGE supports procedural completeness checks relative to a specified question q, context c, and declared evidential requirements, as well as 

failure diagnosis : explanation methods can be analysed to identify missing or weak components (e.g., absent semantic mapping or aggregation), even when they are correctly labelled as post-hoc or intrinsic. Second, GFGE naturally repre-sents hybrid explanation pipelines —such as attribution-guided counterfactuals or concept-based models with post-hoc influence analysis—without forcing them into ambiguous or overlapping categories. Third, by explicitly distinguishing analyst sense-reading from recipient-oriented sense-giving, GFGE makes the transition between evidence and communication inspectable; stakeholder roadmaps identify the audience but do not necessarily trace this transition within each method [72]. Recent methods illustrate the utility of this distinction. ReCalX shows that perturbation-based attributions depend on how the model behaves under the queries used by the post-hoc module: unreliable probabilities at perturbed inputs weaken the evidence before aggregation begins [19]. EECE uses random-forest GFGE: A Framework for XAI Methods 17 

leaf structure to generate candidate counterfactuals; GFGE therefore records both model-structure access in InterpretModel and alternative-outcome search in PostHocInterpretation , while data constraints and the communicated con-trast remain separate roles [73]. Causal backtracking counterfactuals make the assumptions on feasible interventions particularly visible in InterpretData [25]. Concept methods and language-model explanations expose a different boundary. CBM-zero and FACE supply concept-level evidence through differ-ent mechanisms, so InterpretData must state what the concepts mean and 

InterpretModel or PostHocInterpretation must state how they relate to predictions [10, 71]. FaithLM tests whether a generated explanation tracks model behaviour, while FACT-E and LIBERTy provide intervention-based evaluation of reasoning or concept claims [16, 62, 64]. These tests are additional evidence; fluent Aggregation alone does not establish faithfulness. For a clinical audience, CHiRPE illustrates why domain mapping and presentation should be adapted to recipients rather than inferred from attribution scores alone [26]. GFGE therefore provides a common procedural representation alongside the classical axes. It makes method composition, stakeholder alignment, and possible failure points explicit, while leaving fidelity and usefulness to independent evaluation [51]. 

## 5 Instantiating Existing Explanation Methods Using GFGE 

We now instantiate GFGE for established and recent method families. These analytical mappings examine whether heterogeneous techniques can be described with the same module roles; they are not empirical validation of explanation quality. In each case, P denotes preprocessing for the predictive model, while method-specific perturbation, search, or intervention is assigned to an interpreta-tion module. 

5.1 Post-Hoc Attribution Techniques: LIME and SHAP 

Post-hoc attribution methods such as LIME [55] and SHAP [41] seek to explain the predictions of a model without requiring access to its internal mechanisms. They address scenarios where the interpretability of M is limited and explanation requires surrogate or attribution-based tools. 

LIME as an Instance of GFGE. The GFGE instantiation of LIME is as follows: 

– M: any predictive model, including black-box neural models. 

– D: the instance to be explained. 

– P: preprocessing of the instance for M.

– InterpretData : conversion of features into a human-readable form. 

– InterpretModel : no internal evidence is required. 

– InterpretOutput : the target prediction and queried outputs. 18 Zhong 

– PostHocInterpretation : generation of local perturbations and fitting of a sparse surrogate near D.

– Aggregation : formatting of surrogate coefficients into a local explanation highlighting important features. 

SHAP as an Instance of GFGE. SHAP integrates into GFGE in a similar fashion: 

– D: the instance to be explained. 

– P: preprocessing of the instance for M.

– InterpretData : record feature semantics and the background population needed to interpret the attribution. 

– InterpretModel : no internal evidence is required for the model-agnostic implementation. 

– InterpretOutput : the target prediction. 

– PostHocInterpretation : evaluation of feature coalitions against an explicit background distribution, computation of the background-dependent reference value, and computation of Shapley values. 

– Aggregation : representation of these contributions through ranked feature lists, bar plots, or natural language. For a model-specific variant such as TreeSHAP [40], InterpretModel records the tree structure accessed by the procedure and PostHocInterpretation com-putes contributions using that structure. 

5.2 Methods Built on Post-Hoc Attribution Models 

Beyond standalone post-hoc attribution methods, a growing body of research constructs richer explanatory procedures by using attribution models as inter-nal signals. In these approaches, SHAP or similar techniques guide additional reasoning steps such as contrastive reasoning, counterfactual generation, or the aggregation of local explanations into global patterns. Examples include SHAP-guided counterfactual and contrastive explanations [54], Counterfactual Shapley Additive Explanations (CF-SHAP) [1], methods that derive global fea-ture importance by aggregating local counterfactuals [2], and SHAP-enhanced counterfactual explanations for recommendations [76]. These methods form a natural family within GFGE because they combine post-hoc attribution with additional reasoning components. 

SHAP-Enhanced Counterfactuals in GFGE. We illustrate this family using the recommender method from [76]. 

– M: a recommendation model such as matrix factorization or a neural recom-mender. 

– D: the user item interaction to be explained. 

– P: preprocessing of the user–item interaction for the recommendation model. 

– InterpretData : extraction of interpretable user and item features that might change in counterfactual scenarios. GFGE: A Framework for XAI Methods 19 

– InterpretModel : optional inspection of available model structure; otherwise, no internal evidence is assumed. 

– InterpretOutput : recording the model outputs obtained for evaluated coun-terfactual candidates. 

– PostHocInterpretation : computation of Shapley values to identify the most influential features for the current recommendation, followed by a counterfactual search that prioritises modifications to these features. 

– Aggregation : synthesis of SHAP attributions and the counterfactual into a unified explanation, for example “Item A is recommended because features X and Y contributed strongly to its score. To obtain Item B instead, the following feature-level changes would be required.” 

This instantiation shows how GFGE captures hybrid explanation pipelines where post-hoc attributions shape the search space of counterfactual reasoning. 

5.3 Model-Intrinsic Explanation Methods Based on Argumentation 

A different family of explainable approaches relies on intrinsically interpretable models whose structure encodes argumentative relations. Examples include A3R [75], CA-FATA [77], and argumentative explanations for interactive recommen-dations. In these methods, explanations are produced directly by the model, not added post-hoc. 

Argumentation-Based Recommendation Methods as Instances of GFGE. Their instantiation within GFGE is as follows: 

– M: an argumentation-enhanced recommender model whose prediction is derived from evaluating competing arguments. 

– D: the user profile and candidate items. 

– P: transformation of user preferences and item attributes into argument premises. 

– InterpretData : extraction of features that can function as premises or constraints in arguments. 

– InterpretModel : retrieval of support and attack relations and the argument set used by the predictor. 

– InterpretOutput : recording the recommendation and its score or decision; the active arguments remain model evidence in InterpretModel .

– PostHocInterpretation : not required, since explanations are embedded in the model itself. 

– Aggregation : translation of argument structures into a human-readable explanation, often in natural language. 

5.4 Counterfactual and Recourse Methods 

Classical counterfactual methods search for inputs associated with an alternative prediction, sometimes subject to diversity or feasibility constraints [49, 52, 66, 69]. 20 Zhong 

In GFGE, InterpretData records which features may change and which combi-nations are plausible; q specifies the desired outcome, while InterpretOutput 

records observed and candidate model outputs; PostHocInterpretation searches for candidates; and Aggregation reports the selected contrast with its assump-tions. This decomposition separates a prediction-changing input from a feasible action in the world. EECE provides a model-specific instantiation for random forests [73]. 

InterpretModel exposes the decision-tree leaf structure used to construct candidate regions, while PostHocInterpretation searches those regions for counterfactuals. InterpretOutput records the forest’s responses to the evaluated candidates. InterpretData states permitted feature changes and plausibility constraints; Aggregation presents the selected candidate and the properties actually assessed, such as validity, proximity, sparsity, diversity, and actionability. The causal assumptions of backtracking counterfactuals belong in the same data and evidence roles, rather than being inferred from a changed prediction [25]. Visual counterfactuals such as LeapFactual and V-CECE also populate these roles, but require semantic interpretation of generated or edited images before the alternative can be communicated meaningfully [13, 61]. 

5.5 Surrogate, Rule, Concept, and Prototype Methods 

A surrogate tree approximates another model: its rules arise from post-hoc analysis of input–output behaviour [18, 27]. By contrast, a rule list that performs the prediction itself exposes its active rule through model and output interpretation; it needs no separate surrogate stage [3, 70]. The same visual artefact—a rule— therefore occupies different GFGE roles depending on its source. Concept and prototype methods require InterpretData to connect learned features to domain concepts. For TCAV, PostHocInterpretation estimates a concept’s influence on a trained model; for ProtoPNet, InterpretModel exposes prototype similarity used in prediction [15, 34]. CBM-zero makes a pretrained model’s predictions accessible through an invertible concept mapping, while FACE learns concept evidence with classifier supervision [10, 71]. In the GFGE mapping of CBM-zero, constructing the concept mapping belongs to PH because it is an additional analytic construction over the pretrained predictor, rather than a predictive mechanism originally used by the base model. When the converted predictor is the object of inspection, reading its concept-to-output mechanism belongs to IM. The evidence record must therefore identify which predictor is being inspected; the PH construction and subsequent IM inspection are distinct operations, as recorded in Table 4. Aggregation then selects concepts or prototypes relevant to the recipient’s question. Their semantic meaning and predictive fidelity remain distinct evaluation claims. 

5.6 Language-Model and Recipient-Oriented Workflows 

A language model can render recorded evidence as a readable rationale through 

Aggregation without thereby revealing its actual decision process. When lan-GFGE: A Framework for XAI Methods 21 

guage generation is used within Aggregation , it is restricted to rendering already recorded claims. Any newly introduced explanatory proposition must first be recorded as a candidate claim and supported through ID, IM, IO, or PH before it can be communicated as part of the explanation. FaithLM uses interventions to test and refine such accounts, adding evidence to PostHocInterpretation ; mech-anistic circuit studies instead populate InterpretModel with internal evidence [4, 16, 35]. CAuSE combines intervention-based analysis with natural-language explanation of multimodal classifiers [8]. FACT-E and LIBERTy are evalua-tion procedures for reasoning-chain and concept explanations; they test claims generated by a method rather than serving as explanations by themselves [62, 64]. For a clinician-facing workflow such as CHiRPE, InterpretData maps find-ings to symptom domains, PostHocInterpretation contributes attribution evi-dence, and Aggregation presents it in formats informed by clinicians [26]. The intended audience is therefore a parameter of the mapping, not merely a prop-erty of the final graphic or text. Recipient studies must still test whether this presentation supports the intended task [43, 51]. 

5.7 Discussion 

The instantiations above show the sense in which GFGE unifies existing XAI methods. Each method can be expressed as a configuration of the same interpre-tative and communicative roles in Equation 1, while retaining its own evidence source, scope, and assumptions. This does not collapse attributions, counterfactu-als, rules, and generated rationales into equivalent claims. It makes their different information flows and evidential requirements explicit. Table 3 extends the worked examples to the major families in the literature. ID, IM, IO, PH, and A denote InterpretData , InterpretModel , InterpretOutput ,

PostHocInterpretation , and Aggregation . The listed roles describe represen-tative implementations; particular methods can instantiate additional role nodes or repeat role types. 22 Zhong 

Table 3. Representative XAI families within the common GFGE procedure. 

Family Representative methods GFGE roles and evidential issue 

Feature attribution SHAP, TreeSHAP, Integrated Gradients, DeepLIFT, LRP, Grad-CAM [7, 40, 41, 59, 60, 63] ID grounds features; IO records the prediction; PH computes contributions; A presents them. IM supplies structure for model-specific variants. Local and global surrogates LIME, surrogate trees, soft decision trees [18, 27, 55] IO gathers model responses; PH fits an approximation; A reports its rules or coefficients with their scope. Counterfactual and recourse Wachter CF, DiCE, FACE, EECE, BRACE [25, 49, 52, 69, 73] ID records mutable, plausible changes; q fixes the alternative; IO checks outputs; PH searches candidates; A communicates the contrast. EECE also uses IM for forest structure. Attribution-driven hybrid SHAP-guided CF, CF-SHAP, recommendation CF [1, 54, 76] PH composes attribution and search; ID constrains changes; IO records candidate model outputs; A combines findings and assumptions. Concept and prototype TCAV, ProtoPNet, ProtoTree, CBM-zero, FACE concept extraction [10, 15, 34, 50, 71] ID grounds concepts or prototypes; IM exposes intrinsic concept mechanisms; PH tests post-hoc influence; A presents selected evidence. Intrinsic rules and lists Falling Rule Lists, CORELS, decision sets [3, 36, 70] IM exposes predictive and active rules; IO records the result; ID grounds rule terms; A adapts the account to the question. Argumentation-based models A3R, CA-FATA, argumentative recommendation [53, 75, 77] ID grounds premises; IM exposes support, attack, and active arguments; IO records the result; A communicates the justification. Generated rationales FaithLM, CAuSE [8, 16] IO records target behaviour and, when produced by M, candidate rationales; PH tests explanatory claims; A renders supported, recorded claims. Mechanistic analyses Circuit localisation, reasoning circuits [4, 35] IM identifies internal components; PH may test causal relevance; A states supported mechanistic claims. Recipient-oriented workflows Contrastive accounts, CHiRPE [11, 26] ID supplies domain meanings; q

selects a contrast, IO records corresponding outputs, and A adapts the account to the audience. 

The table exposes regularities that a family label does not. An attribution and a surrogate both use PH, yet one reports contributions and the other an approximation. A counterfactual adds an alternative outcome and constraints on admissible changes; attribution-guided variants compose those operations. A transparent rule or argumentation model may obtain reasons from IM without GFGE: A Framework for XAI Methods 23 

PH, but still needs A to answer a recipient’s question. An LLM rationale can be readable without establishing that it reflects model computation. GFGE’s commonality is procedural; evidence and validity remain method-dependent. 

An Author-Coded Boundary Audit Against Nearby Frameworks. To make the claimed difference inspectable, Table 4 applies the same three external methods to the taxonomy of Schwalbe and Finzel [58], the roadmap of Wang et al. [72], and GFGE. The first identifies relevant method traits, including interactivity and human actors; the second connects stakeholder needs, lifecycle stage, questions, and methods. We compare the information each published representation requires a user to specify , not what could be added in an extension. The GFGE coding applies Table 2 to the method descriptions; it is our analysis, not a result reported by those papers. Each case tests a different boundary: learned concept structure versus its post-hoc construction, calibration of perturbation evidence, and generation versus intervention testing of a rationale. 

Table 4. The same methods viewed through two related frameworks and GFGE. Entries describe what each representation foregrounds; “unspecified” means the cited method does not supply that GFGE operation in the present analysis.   

> Method Method-trait taxonomy Stakeholder roadmap GFGE trace and unresolved claim
> CBM-zero [71] Concept-based, model-access-dependent representation; local concept claims can be distinguished from global model traits. Can pair a concept-level “what/why” question with an audience and stage. PH constructs an invertible concept mapping; IM reads the converted predictor’s concept-to-output mechanism; IO records prediction preservation; ID must ground concept meaning. Recipient-specific A is unspecified. The order PH →IM and the semantic gap are explicit. ReCalX [19] Perturbation-based, post-hoc analysis with reliability as a relevant method property. Can identify a debugging need and method for a prediction question. IO records scores under perturbation; PH checks calibration, adjusts the queried evidence, then recomputes an explanation. A downstream account and its audience are unspecified. An attribution without the calibration assumption remains a flagged claim. FaithLM [16] Language explanation with iterative intervention-based assessment. Can connect a recipient’s question to a language explanation method. IO records rationales produced by
> M; PH intervenes to test faithfulness and inform revision; A renders supported, recorded claims. This is a method-internal loop, not observed recipient feedback. Recipient understanding remains unspecified.

The difference is not that these frameworks cannot mention evidence or stake-holders. It is that GFGE requires the source and operation of each communicated claim, the order of transformations, and a mark for any missing semantic or recipient-facing step. The three rows demonstrate that this contract can reveal 24 Zhong 

boundary choices and omissions in selected cases. They do not show that GFGE is uniquely expressive or that another framework could not be extended to hold the same information. 

Reproducibility and Remaining Validation. The audit is specified as a coding exercise that can be independently repeated: fix q, u, and c; read the method’s published operations in order; assign each operation only when its necessary condition in Table 2 holds; record source, assumptions, and output claim; mark unsupported or absent roles as unresolved; and retain disagreements rather than resolve them by an “other” category. This paper reports one author-coded pass over three purposively chosen external cases, with no annotator agreement statistic and no user study. An independent test should freeze these rules, sample unfamiliar methods by a declared selection rule, use at least two independent coders, and report role-level agreement, unresolved cases, and revisions to the codebook. 

Failure Cases Exposed by the IES–GFGE Mapping. First, a LIME or SHAP attribution to engineered or latent features may be mathematically sound yet unintelligible to a user. The weak link is ID’s mapping from model variables to recipient concepts: analyst sense-reading has occurred, but sense-giving is inadequately supported. ReCalX adds that PH may itself rest on unreliable predictions for perturbed inputs [19]. Second, an intrinsically interpretable linear model, rule list, or argumentation model can expose its structure through IM without answering a contrastive question. That requires q to identify the alternative, IO to record its model output, and A to communicate it. Likewise, a counterfactual that changes a model score is not necessarily an actionable intervention: ID must record mutability and causal constraints [25]. Third, a fluent generated rationale may omit the information used by a language model. PH can supply intervention evidence, as in FaithLM, while FACT-E and LIBERTy test distinct faithfulness claims [16, 62, 64]. A passed test does not make all explanations of the same family faithful. Table 5 shows how this analysis retains conventional labels while making the additional operations and gaps visible. GFGE: A Framework for XAI Methods 25 

Table 5. Explanatory gaps left implicit by taxonomic labels.      

> Workflow Usual label GFGE diagnosis
> LIME/SHAP on latent features Local, post-hoc PH can compute scores while ID lacks a user-understandable mapping; A should state that limitation. Attribution-guided counterfactual Attribution or counterfactual PH composes two operations; ID constrains changes, qspecifies the target, IO checks it, and A joins the claims. EECE or causal recourse Counterfactual, post-hoc IM may supply forest structure; ID records feasible changes; PH searches candidates; A reports assumptions. Intrinsic rule or argumentation model Inherently interpretable IM exposes reasoning structure, but IO selects the relevant contrast and A addresses the recipient. Concept/prototype hybrid Concept or prototype based ID grounds semantics, IM or PH identifies influence, and A communicates the supported finding. Generated LLM rationale Natural-language explanation New propositions are recorded as candidates and require evidence in ID, IM, IO, or PH; A renders supported claims. PH can test faithfulness to model behaviour.

These mappings are illustrative. They establish neither completeness nor comparative superiority. A stronger evaluation would ask independent annotators to map unfamiliar methods to GFGE and measure agreement and coverage; test evidential claims within each module; and study whether the resulting accounts improve understanding or decisions for intended recipients. These three levels of evidence should remain separate. 

## 6 Conclusion 

This paper introduced GFGE to unify the description of explanation generation across XAI methods. Grounded in interpretative frameworks and the complemen-tary activities of sense-reading and sense-giving, the Interpret/Explain Schema connects an analyst’s interpretation of system evidence to the communication of an account and its interpretation by a recipient. GFGE operationalises this relation through data interpretation, model interpretation, output interpreta-tion, optional post-hoc analysis, and aggregation, with the explanatory question, audience, and context made explicit. The method instantiations show how intrinsic, post-hoc, and hybrid ap-proaches can be expressed through this shared vocabulary while retaining their distinct evidence sources, assumptions, and scope. Role-typed operation graphs capture method-specific dependencies and repeated roles; claim-level records connect communicated explanations to the operations and evidence that support them. This representation makes the contribution of each operation explicit, including the boundary between constructing evidence and selecting and ren-dering supported claims. It provides a common basis for comparing explanation 26 Zhong 

procedures, examining hybrid workflows, and identifying unresolved explanatory dependencies relative to a specified question and declared evidential requirements. Future work should assess the reproducibility of the coding contract through independent mappings of unfamiliar methods, examine the support for explana-tory claims through method-specific evidence checks, and evaluate recipient understanding and use through user studies. GFGE’s central contribution is a procedural account that brings evidence, interpretation, and communication into a common framework for XAI. This account supports the analysis of how existing methods contribute to an explanation for a particular question and recipient. Bibliography 

[1] Albini, E., Long, J., Dervovic, D., Magazzeni, D.: Counterfactual shap-ley additive explanations. In: Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency. pp. 1054–1070 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1145/3531146.3533168 [2] Alfeo, A.L., Zippo, A.G., Catrambone, V., Cimino, M.G., Toschi, N., Valenza, G.: From local counterfactuals to global feature importance: efficient, robust, and model-agnostic explanations for brain connectivity networks. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 236 , 107550 (2023) [3] Angelino, E., Larus-Stone, N., Alabi, D., Seltzer, M., Rudin, C.: Learning certifiably optimal rule lists for categorical data. Journal of Machine Learning Research 18 (234), 1–78 (2018) [4] Arad, D., Belinkov, Y., Chen, H., Kim, N., Mohebbi, H., Mueller, A., Sarti, G., Tutek, M.: Findings of the BlackboxNLP 2025 shared task: Localizing circuits and causal variables in language models. In: Proceedings of the 8th BlackboxNLP Workshop: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP. pp. 543–552 (2025). https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2025.blackboxnlp-1.32 [5] Arduin, P.E., Grundstein, M., Rosenthal-Sabroux, C.: Information and knowledge system. John Wiley & Sons (2015) [6] Arrieta, A.B., Díaz-Rodríguez, N., Del Ser, J., Bennetot, A., Tabik, S., Barbado, A., García, S., Gil-López, S., Molina, D., Benjamins, R., Chatila, R., Herrera, F.: Explainable artificial intelligence (XAI): Concepts, taxonomies, opportunities and challenges toward responsible AI. Information Fusion 58 ,82–115 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2019.12.012 [7] Bach, S., Binder, A., Montavon, G., Klauschen, F., Müller, K.R., Samek, W.: On pixel-wise explanations for non-linear classifier decisions by layer-wise relevance propagation. PLOS ONE 10 (7), e0130140 (2015) [8] Bandyopadhyay, D., Bhattacharjee, S., Hasanuzzaman, M., Ekbal, A.: CAuSE: Decoding multimodal classifiers using faithful natural language explanation. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 

14 , 829–851 (2026). https://doi.org/10.1162/tacl.a.686 [9] Bhatt, U., Xiang, A., Sharma, S., Weller, A., Taly, A., Jia, Y., Ghosh, J., Puri, R., Moura, J.M.F., Eckersley, P.: Explainable machine learning in deployment. In: Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency. pp. 648–657 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1145/3351095.3375624 [10] Bhusal, D., Clifford, M., Rampazzi, S., Rastogi, N.: FACE: Faithful automatic concept extraction. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 38 (2025). https://doi.org/10.52202/085713-1462 [11] Buçinca, Z., Swaroop, S., Paluch, A.E., Doshi-Velez, F., Gajos, K.Z.: Contrastive explanations that anticipate human misconceptions can im-prove human decision-making skills. In: Proceedings of the 2025 CHI 28 Zhong 

Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. pp. 1–25 (2025). https://doi.org/10.1145/3706598.3713229 [12] Cai, J., Rahman, M., Enouen, J., Qian, L., Liu, Y.: A survey on actionable interpretability in large language models. In: Proceedings of the Thirty-Fifth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intel-ligence. pp. 7787–7797 (2026). https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2026/865, https://www.ijcai.org/proceedings/2026/865 [13] Cao, Z., Zhao, X., Krieger, L., Scharr, H., Assent, I.: LeapFactual: Re-liable visual counterfactual explanation using conditional flow match-ing. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 38 (2025). https://doi.org/10.52202/085713-3961 [14] Carvalho, D.V., Pereira, E.M., Cardoso, J.S.: Machine learning interpretabil-ity: A survey on methods and metrics. Electronics 8(8), 832 (2019) [15] Chen, C., Li, O., Tao, D., Barnett, A., Rudin, C., Su, J.K.: This looks like that: deep learning for interpretable image recognition. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32 (2019) [16] Chuang, Y.N., Wang, G., Chang, C.Y., Tang, R., Zhong, S., Yang, F., Wen, A., Du, M., Cai, X., Braverman, V., Hu, X.: FaithLM: Towards faithful explanations for large language models. In: Proceedings of the 19th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). pp. 3802–3824 (2026). https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2026.eacl-long.177 [17] Cousineau, C., Dara, R.: Interpretability taxonomy: An approach for artificial intelligence developers technique selection. Discover Data 3, 60 (2025). https://doi.org/10.1007/s44248-025-00096-6 [18] Craven, M.W.: Extracting comprehensible models from trained neural net-works. The University of Wisconsin-Madison (1996) [19] Decker, T., Tresp, V., Buettner, F.: Improving perturbation-based explanations by understanding the role of uncertainty calibration. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 38 (2025). https://doi.org/10.52202/085713-0226 [20] Despres, C., Chauvel, D.: Knowledge management (s). Journal of Knowledge Management 3(2), 110–123 (1999) [21] Doshi-Velez, F., Kim, B.: Towards a rigorous science of interpretable machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.08608 (2017) [22] Du, M., Liu, N., Hu, X.: Techniques for interpretable machine learning. Communications of the ACM 63 (1), 68–77 (2019) [23] Elsayed, A., Wu, Y., Yawney, J., Gadsden, S.A.: Explainable artificial intelligence: An expanded taxonomy by mechanism and interpretabil-ity perspectives. Intelligent Systems with Applications p. 200709 (2026). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iswa.2026.200709 [24] European Parliament and Council of the European Union: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence (2024), https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj, Artificial Intelligence Act, Official Journal of the European Union, 12 July 2024 GFGE: A Framework for XAI Methods 29 

[25] Fatemi, P., Sharifian, E., Yassaee, M.H.: A new approach to backtracking counterfactual explanations: A unified causal framework for efficient model interpretability. In: Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 267, pp. 16273–16285 (2025), https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/fatemi25a.html [26] Fong, S., Wang, Z., Oliveira, G.C., Zhao, X., Jiang, Y., Liu, J., Colton, B.L., Woods, S.W., Shenton, M., Nelson, B., Ge, Z., Dwyer, D.: CHiRPE: A step towards real-world clinical NLP with clinician-oriented model explanations. In: Proceedings of the 19th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers). pp. 646–658 (2026). https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2026.eacl-short.46 [27] Frosst, N., Hinton, G.: Distilling a neural network into a soft decision tree. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.09784 (2017) [28] Gilpin, L.H., Bau, D., Yuan, B.Z., Bajwa, A., Specter, M., Kagal, L.: Ex-plaining explanations: An approach to evaluating interpretability of machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.00069 (2018) [29] Guidotti, R., Monreale, A., Ruggieri, S., Turini, F., Giannotti, F., Pedreschi, D.: A survey of methods for explaining black box models. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 51 (5), 1–42 (2018) [30] Hall, P., Gill, N.: An introduction to machine learning interpretability. O’Reilly Media, Incorporated (2019) [31] Hoffman, R.R., Mueller, S.T., Klein, G., Litman, J.: Metrics for explainable AI: Challenges and prospects. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.04608 (2018) [32] Jones, N.A., Ross, H., Lynam, T., Perez, P., Leitch, A.: Mental models: an interdisciplinary synthesis of theory and methods. Ecology and Society 16 (1) (2011) [33] Josephson, J.R., Josephson, S.G.: Abductive inference: Computation, philos-ophy, technology. Cambridge University Press (1996) [34] Kim, B., Wattenberg, M., Gilmer, J., Cai, C., Wexler, J., Viegas, F., Sayres, R.: Interpretability beyond feature attribution: Quantitative testing with concept activation vectors (TCAV). In: International Conference on Machine Learning. pp. 2668–2677. PMLR (2018) [35] Kim, G., Valentino, M., Freitas, A.: Reasoning circuits in language models: A mechanistic interpretation of syllogistic inference. In: Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025. pp. 10074–10095 (2025). https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2025.findings-acl.525 [36] Lakkaraju, H., Bach, S.H., Leskovec, J.: Interpretable decision sets: A joint framework for description and prediction. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. pp. 1675–1684 (2016) [37] Lewis, D.: Causal explanation. In: Philosophical Papers, Volume II, pp. 214–240. Oxford University Press (1986) [38] Lipton, Z.C.: The mythos of model interpretability: In machine learning, the concept of interpretability is both important and slippery. Queue 16 (3), 31–57 (2018) 30 Zhong 

[39] Lombrozo, T.: The structure and function of explanations. Trends in Cogni-tive Sciences 10 (10), 464–470 (2006) [40] Lundberg, S.M., Erion, G.G., Lee, S.I.: Consistent individualized feature attribution for tree ensembles. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03888 (2018) [41] Lundberg, S.M., Lee, S.I.: A unified approach to interpreting model predic-tions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30 (2017) [42] Malle, B.F.: How the mind explains behavior: Folk explanations, meaning, and social interaction. MIT Press (2006) [43] Mangold, A., Zietz, J., Weinhold, S., Pannasch, S.: On the design and evaluation of human-centered explainable AI systems: A systematic review and taxonomy. Advances in Human-Computer Interaction 2026 , 8450102 (2026). https://doi.org/10.1155/ahci/8450102 [44] Miller, T.: Explanation in artificial intelligence: Insights from the social sciences. Artificial Intelligence 267 , 1–38 (2019) [45] Mittelstadt, B., Russell, C., Wachter, S.: Explaining explanations in AI. In: Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency. pp. 279–288 (2019) [46] Mohseni, S., Zarei, N., Ragan, E.D.: A multidisciplinary survey and frame-work for design and evaluation of explainable AI systems. ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems (TiiS) 11 (3-4), 1–45 (2021) [47] Molnar, C.: Interpretable machine learning. Lulu. com (2020) [48] Montavon, G., Samek, W., Müller, K.R.: Methods for interpreting and understanding deep neural networks. Digital Signal Processing 73 , 1–15 (2018) [49] Mothilal, R.K., Sharma, A., Tan, C.: Explaining machine learning classifiers through diverse counterfactual explanations. In: Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency. pp. 607–617 (2020) [50] Nauta, M., Van Bree, R., Seifert, C.: Neural prototype trees for interpretable fine-grained image recognition. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 14933–14943 (2021) [51] Pičulin, M., Petek, B., Ograjenšek, I., Strumbelj, E.: Position: Explain-able AI cannot advance without better user studies. In: Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning. Proceed-ings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 267, pp. 81977–81994 (2025), https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/piculin25a.html [52] Poyiadzi, R., Sokol, K., Santos-Rodriguez, R., De Bie, T., Flach, P.: FACE: Feasible and Actionable Counterfactual Explanations. In: Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society. pp. 344–350 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1145/3375627.3375850 [53] Rago, A., Cocarascu, O., Toni, F.: Argumentation-based recommendations: Fantastic explanations and how to find them. In: Proceedings of IJCAI. pp. 1949–1955 (2018) [54] Rathi, S.: Generating counterfactual and contrastive explanations using SHAP. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.09293 (2019) GFGE: A Framework for XAI Methods 31 

[55] Ribeiro, M.T., Singh, S., Guestrin, C.: “Why Should I Trust You?”: Explaining the Predictions of Any Classifier. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. pp. 1135–1144 (2016) [56] Rudin, C.: Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high stakes decisions and use interpretable models instead. Nature Machine Intelligence 

1(5), 206–215 (2019) [57] Samek, W., Montavon, G., Lapuschkin, S., Anders, C.J., Müller, K.R.: Explaining deep neural networks and beyond: A review of methods. Proceedings of the IEEE 109 (3), 247–278 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1109/JPROC.2021.3060483 [58] Schwalbe, G., Finzel, B.: A comprehensive taxonomy for explainable artificial intelligence: A systematic survey of surveys on methods and concepts. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 38 , 3043–3101 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10618-022-00867-8 [59] Selvaraju, R.R., Cogswell, M., Das, A., Vedantam, R., Parikh, D., Batra, D.: Grad-CAM: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based local-ization. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 618–626 (2017) [60] Shrikumar, A., Greenside, P., Kundaje, A.: Learning important features through propagating activation differences. In: International Conference on Machine Learning. pp. 3145–3153. PMLR (2017) [61] Spanos, N., Lymperaiou, M., Filandrianos, G., Thomas, K., Voulodimos, A., Stamou, G.: V-CECE: Visual counterfactual explanations via conceptual edits. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 38 (2025). https://doi.org/10.52202/085713-2493 [62] Sun, Y., Zuo, A., Xie, H., Gao, W., Gong, M., Ma, J.: FACT-E: Causality-inspired evaluation for trustworthy chain-of-thought reasoning. In: Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2026. pp. 20275–20293 (2026). https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2026.findings-acl.1014 [63] Sundararajan, M., Taly, A., Yan, Q.: Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In: International Conference on Machine Learning. pp. 3319–3328. PMLR (2017) [64] Toker, G., Calderon, N., Amosy, O., Reichart, R.: LIBERTy: Acausal framework for benchmarking concept-based explanations of LLMs with structural counterfactuals. In: Findings of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2026. pp. 8149–8186 (2026). https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2026.findings-acl.399 [65] Tsuchiya, S.: Improving knowledge creation ability through organizational learning. In: ISMICK’93 Proceedings, International Symposium on the Management of Industrial and Corporate Knowledge. pp. 87–95 (1993) [66] Ustun, B., Spangher, A., Liu, Y.: Actionable recourse in linear classifica-tion. In: Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency. pp. 10–19 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1145/3287560.3287566 32 Zhong 

[67] Vilone, G., Longo, L.: Notions of explainability and evaluation approaches for explainable artificial intelligence. Information Fusion 76 , 89–106 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2021.05.009 [68] Wachter, S., Mittelstadt, B., Floridi, L.: Why a right to explanation of automated decision-making does not exist in the general data pro-tection regulation. International Data Privacy Law 7(2), 76–99 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1093/idpl/ipx005 [69] Wachter, S., Mittelstadt, B., Russell, C.: Counterfactual explanations without opening the black box: Automated decisions and the GDPR. Harvard Journal of Law and Technology 31 (2), 841–887 (2018) [70] Wang, F., Rudin, C.: Falling rule lists. In: Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. pp. 1013–1022. PMLR (2015) [71] Wang, Z., Popel, A., Sulam, J.: Concept bottleneck model with zero performance loss. In: Conference on Parsimony and Learning. Pro-ceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 280, pp. 433–461 (2025), https://proceedings.mlr.press/v280/wang25b.html [72] Wang, Z., Huang, C., Yao, X.: A roadmap of explainable artificial intelligence: Explain to whom, when, what and how? ACM Transac-tions on Autonomous and Adaptive Systems 19 (4), 20:1–20:40 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1145/3702004 [73] Zhang, H., Zhong, J.: Efficient and effective counterfactual explanations for random forests. Expert Systems with Applications 293 , 128661 (2025). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2025.128661 [74] Zhong, J., Negre, E.: AI: To interpret or to explain? In: Congrès Inforsid (INFormatique des ORganisations et Systèmes d’Information et de Décision). pp. 149–164 (2021), Dijon, France. HAL: hal-03529203 [75] Zhong, J., Negre, E.: A3R: Argumentative explanations for recom-mendations. In: 2022 IEEE 9th International Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics (DSAA). pp. 1–9. IEEE (2022). https://doi.org/10.1109/DSAA54385.2022.10032419 [76] Zhong, J., Negre, E.: SHAP-enhanced counterfactual explanations for recommendations. In: Proceedings of the 37th ACM/SIGAPP Symposium on Applied Computing. pp. 1365–1372 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1145/3477314.3507029 [77] Zhong, J., Negre, E.: Argumentation meets matrix factorization: A dual perspective for explainable recommendations. Applied Soft Computing 183 ,113652 (2025). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2025.113652