Title: Code-on-Graph: Iterative Programmatic Reasoning via Large Language Models on Knowledge Graphs

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.03705v1

Published Time: Wed, 03 Jun 2026 01:17:10 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
## Code-on-Graph: Iterative Programmatic Reasoning via Large Language Models on Knowledge Graphs 

Weiwei Ding 1,2†, Zixuan Li 1∗, Long Bai 1, Zhuo Chen 1, Kun Su 2,3, Fei Wang 1

Xiaolong Jin 1∗, Jin Zhang 1, Jiafeng Guo 1 and Xueqi Cheng 11Key Laboratory of AI Safety, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences 

2Shandong University 

3Shandong University-Weihai Research Institute of Industrial Technology 

Abstract 

Knowledge Graphs (KGs) are widely used to mitigate the limitations of Large Language Models (LLMs), such as outdated knowledge and hallucinations. Existing LLM–KG integra-tion frameworks typically rely on predefined operators to retrieve factual knowledge from KGs and inject it into prompts for answer gen-eration. This paradigm faces two critical bot-tlenecks: 1) Inflexibility : The predefined op-erators are limited in scope and thus lack suf-ficient compositional expressiveness to fully capture the complex semantics required by KG questions. 2) Unscalability : Direct injection of factual knowledge into prompts limits scal-ability in handling large-scale factual knowl-edge. To address these two bottlenecks, we pro-pose Code-on-Graph (CoG), a programmatic reasoning framework for LLM–KG integration. Specifically, given the factual knowledge re-trieved at each reasoning step, CoG first identi-fies the corresponding KG schemas and repre-sents these schemas as Python classes, which serve as abstract interfaces to the retrieved facts. It then generates executable code grounded in these classes, with the retrieved facts instan-tiated as objects of the corresponding classes during execution. This design enables flexible code-based reasoning while avoiding the direct injection of large-scale factual knowledge into prompts. Experiments on WebQSP, CWQ, and GrailQA demonstrate that CoG outperforms prior state-of-the-art models by up to 10.5 %. 

1 Introduction 

Large Language Models (LLMs) (Zhao et al., 2025; Cahyawijaya et al., 2024) have demonstrated im-pressive Natural Language Processing (NLP) ca-pabilities, significantly enhancing tasks such as question answering (Wang et al., 2023; Li et al., 

> ∗

Corresponding authors. 

> †

This work was completed during Weiwei Ding’s internship at the Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences. User             

> Question Subtask
> tiOperators KG
> LLM Reasoning Answer
> Question: What is the second biggest state in the United States? Answer: Texas
> Loop Subtasks
> An LLM -KG method example
> Subtask 4:
> Find the second
> biggest one.
> Inflexibility
> Operation Error: no
> offset opertaion
> S-EXP :
> … ARGMAX location_area
> AND entity_type …
> Alaska
> Unscalability
> Context Error:
> Exceeded
> 1. Find all the places in the US.
> 2. Filter places of state type.
> 3. Find the area of each state.
> 4. Find the second biggest one. Answer
> ai
> Subtask 4:
> Find the second
> biggest one.
> Predefined tool:
> get_entity_by_constraint(
> location_area, max)
> Alaska
> Inflexibility
> Operation Error: no
> offset operation
> Reasoning over triples:
> The places in the US are ...
> (massive) [incomplete]
> Subtask 2:
> Filter places of
> state type.
> California

Figure 1: Limitations of the existing LLM-KG methods. 

2023b), text generation (Shi et al., 2025), and tex-tual reasoning (Wei et al., 2023). Despite their success, LLMs remain susceptible to out-of-date knowledge and hallucinations. Since KGs (Auer et al., 2007; Bollacker et al., 2008) provide large-scale, structured, and reliable factual knowledge, many studies (Sun et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024a; Li et al., 2024a; Jiang et al., 2024) have attempted to integrate LLMs with KGs to mitigate these is-sues. SPARQL is one of the most widely used query languages for accessing and reasoning over knowl-edge graphs, offering an expressive interface for specifying graph patterns, joins, constraints, and ag-gregations over structured facts. However, directly asking LLMs to generate executable SPARQL queries remains difficult, since it requires accurate schema grounding, compositional graph-pattern construction, variable binding, and strict syntac-tic correctness (Huang et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2024a). Therefore, instead of directly generat-ing SPARQL, prior LLM-KG studies commonly adopt S-expressions as compact intermediate log-ical forms (Gu et al., 2021; Shu et al., 2022; Ye et al., 2022), or equip LLMs with predefined tools/operators to interact with KGs (Sun et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024a; Jiang et al., 2024). These 

> arXiv:2606.03705v1 [cs.AI] 2 Jun 2026

alternatives lower the burden of query generation by hiding low-level SPARQL syntax behind a more constrained interaction interface, such as relation traversal, entity retrieval, filtering, and aggregation. However, such constrained interfaces also lead to two critical bottlenecks. 1) Inflexibility : S-expressions and predefined tools usually restrict reasoning logic to a fixed grammar or operator in-ventory, including relation traversal, entity retrieval, filtering, and simple aggregation operations such as counting and maximization. However, complex KGQA questions often require more fine-grained and task-specific constraints, such as ranking with offsets, nested filtering, value comparison, or cus-tomized aggregation. As illustrated in Figure 1, existing methods fail to answer the question “What is the second biggest state in the United States?” 1

because they only support the argmax operator. 2) 

Unscalability : Existing methods usually inject all retrieved KG facts into prompts for LLM reasoning, which limits their performance on large-scale KGs. As reasoning steps increase, retrieved facts grow rapidly, making it increasingly inefficient to inject all facts into prompts. Meanwhile, context-length constraints severely limit the number of facts that LLMs can actually use for reasoning (Luo et al., 2024b). As shown in Figure 1, existing methods may exceed the context length limit and fail to in-clude key information relevant to the question. We observe that KG schemas provide highly abstract representations of large collections of fac-tual knowledge, offering an effective way to guide LLMs to operate over large-scale KG facts. The key challenge, however, is how to enable LLMs to understand complex schemas and adaptively com-pose task-specific reasoning operations conditioned on the input question. Notably, in programming languages such as Python, schemas can be naturally represented as classes, providing a structured and LLM-readable interface (Gao et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023). Reasoning over the corresponding facts can then be implemented through executable functions, allowing LLMs to flexibly compose task-specific operations over large-scale KG facts. This provides a more flexible and scalable alternative to existing methods that rely on S-expressions or predefined tools. We instantiate these ideas in Code-on-Graph (CoG), an iterative framework with three stages: (1) Planning, which decomposes a complex question 

> 1This question is drawn from the WebQSP dataset.

into subtasks; (2) Coding, which retrieves facts, ab-stracts their schemas into Python class definitions, and generates task-specific executable operations beyond predefined operators; and (3) Executing, which provides the retrieved facts to the code as class instances, runs the generated code in a sand-box environment, and uses execution feedback for correction and retry. In this way, CoG achieves flexibility through dynamic code generation over schema-level abstractions and scalability through compact class-based fact representation. Our main contributions are as follows: • We propose CoG, an iterative programmatic reasoning framework for LLM-KG that de-composes complex questions into subtasks, generates executable code over schema-level abstractions, and refines the code through exe-cution feedback. • By representing schemas with Python classes and conducting schema-level code generation and execution, CoG enables flexible opera-tions over massive factual knowledge with minimal token usage. • By improving both scalability and flexibility, CoG effectively handles complex queries and outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods by up to 10.5%. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 LLM-KG Integration 

Early integration of LLMs with KGs primarily fol-lowed the semantic parsing paradigm, where mod-els translate natural language into logical forms like SPARQL or Cypher to query the database (Luo et al., 2024a; Li et al., 2023a). While ef-fective on closed schemas, these methods suffer from brittleness when facing schema inconsisten-cies or complex multi-hop reasoning requirements. To improve robustness, recent research has shifted toward agentic reasoning frameworks. Representa-tive methods such as Think-on-Graph (ToG) (Sun et al., 2024) and Plan-on-Graph (PoG) (Chen et al., 2024a) treat the LLM as an autonomous agent that iteratively explores the graph structure. Similarly, frameworks like StructGPT (Jiang et al., 2023a), KG-Agent (Jiang et al., 2024), and RoG (Luo et al., 2024b) utilize iterative tool invocation or retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) (He et al., 2024; Gao et al., 2025) to navigate external knowledge. Planning 

> What was the last Super Bowl won
> by the team with the fight song
> Renegade?
> Question

Interaction History    

> step subtask Result
> 1Find the team with the
> fight song Renegade
> Pittsburgh
> Steelers
> Find the Super Bowl
> championships won by the
> team from step 1.
> 2
> Super
> Bowl XIII
> ...
> NEW

Evaluator  

> whether to stop

Answer 

> finish

Subtask Planner 

> propose the next subtask

Current Subtask 

Subtask 2: Find the Super Bowl 

championships won by the team from 

step 1. 

Coding 

Abstract Subgraph to Schema                  

> Pittsburgh
> Steelers
> season
> 2004 NFL
> season
> SuperBowl
> XIII
> champion
> ...
> 1964 NFL
> Domain Predicate Range
> Sports
> Team champion Champion
> Sports
> Team season Sports
> Season
> ... ... ...
> class SportsTeam :
> def __init__(self, champion,
> season):
> self. champion =champion
> self. season =season
> class Champion :...
> Class Definitions Code

Generate Executable Code   

> Entity Instantiation Code
> ...
> entities. append (renegade)
> entities. append (pittsburgh_steelers)
> entities. append (1964NFL)
> entities. append (2004NFL)
> ...

Executing 

Executable Bundle          

> for entity in entities:
> if isinstance(entity, SportsTeam ):
> for champion in entity. champions :
> result. append (champion)
> Operation Code
> Question
> Interaction
> History
> Current
> Subtask

Code 

Generator 

> Class
> Definitions
> Class Definitions Code
> Entity Instantiation Code
> Operation Code

Sandbox Execution 

Execute 

Failed Successful   

> AttributeError:
> 'SportsTeam' object
> has no attribute
> 'champions '. Did you
> mean: ' champion '?
> Result 2:
> Super Bowl XIII,
> Super Bowl XLIII,
> etc.

Update History & Iterate 

Retrieve Relevant Triples 

Retriever KG 

Error 

Feedback Figure 2: The framework of CoG. 

Compared with conventional semantic parsing, CoG does not aim to generate a single database query in one step. Instead, it treats KG reasoning as an iterative program synthesis problem over re-trieved schema abstractions. Compared with agen-tic tool-use frameworks, CoG does not depend on a small fixed operator inventory to represent all reasoning patterns. Instead, it allows the model to synthesize task-specific executable logic, making intermediate reasoning states explicit and reusable. 

2.2 Program-Aided Reasoning 

This paradigm demonstrates the effectiveness of decoupling reasoning (via program synthesis) from computation (via execution), significantly mitigat-ing hallucination and improving performance on structured-data reasoning, particularly in mathe-matical, algorithmic, and deep research tasks (Gao et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023; Li et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2026). This success has extended to gen-eral tool-augmented agents (Schick et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2023) and neuro-symbolic methods for structured data, such as Binder (Cheng et al., 2023) for tables and ViperGPT (Surís et al., 2023) for visual reasoning. For KG, although code is widely used as a schema representation method in KG construction (Li et al., 2024c; Zuo et al., 2025; Guo et al., 2024), its application in KGQA re-mains limited. Existing program-aided KG ap-proaches (Chen et al., 2024b, 2026) typically rely on generating standard query languages or invoking a static set of predefined function primitives (e.g., rigid hop or filter operators). These fixed operators lack the flexibility to handle the diverse reasoning patterns found in open-domain questions. Inspired by object-oriented programming, our CoG frame-work advances this field by synthesizing dynamic Python code over abstracted KG objects. This al-lows the model to "write its own tools" on the fly, offering superior generalization compared to rigid API calls. 

3 Preliminaries 

Following previous work (Sun et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024a), in this paper, we evaluate CoG on KGQA, a representative and widely studied task for LLM–KG integration that aims to answer natural language questions through reasoning over KGs. 

3.1 Knowledge Graph 

A KG is a structured representation of factual knowledge, typically modeled as a set of relational triples: 

G = {(e, r, e ′) | e, e ′ ∈ E , r ∈ R} , (1) where E denotes the set of entities and R denotes the set of relations. Each triple (e, r, e ′) represents a factual assertion that relation r holds between a head entity e and a tail entity e′.3.2 KGQA 

Formally, given a natural language question q, a KG G, and a set of topic entities Tq ⊆ E mentioned in q, the goal of KGQA is to predict a set of answers 

Aq that correctly answer the question. Following common practice in prior work, we assume that topic entities and answer entities are al-ready linked to their corresponding KG identifiers: 

Tq, Aq ⊆ E . (2) This setting isolates the reasoning component of KGQA by bypassing entity linking, allowing the model to focus on semantic understanding and multi-hop inference over the graph. In many benchmark datasets, each question is as-sociated with a gold reasoning path or an equivalent structured query (e.g., SPARQL), which defines a sequence of relations connecting topic entities to answer entities. However, during inference, such gold paths are not available and must be implicitly or explicitly inferred by the model. 

4 Methodology 

CoG is a programmatic reasoning framework that iteratively decomposes complex questions into sub-tasks and performs schema-level code-based rea-soning over a KG. As illustrated in Figure 2, each CoG iteration comprises three core modules: (1) 

Planning , which decomposes the question into manageable subtasks to progressively reach the answer; (2) Coding , which maps the schemas of retrieved subgraphs into Python classes and gen-erates code based on these classes; and (3) Exe-cuting , which executes and refines the code over instantiated classes in a loop to obtain the final results. 

4.1 Planning 

The planning module reduces program synthesis difficulty by decomposing a complex question into a sequence of executable subtasks. As illustrated in Figure 2, rather than committing to a rigid, hand-designed decomposition strategy, CoG uses the full interaction history to decide what should be solved next and when reasoning should stop. This makes the reasoning process adaptive to intermediate dis-coveries and avoids unnecessary exploration. 

Subtask Generation. To avoid the inflexibility and redundant reasoning paths inherent in static decomposition, the generator Mgen dynamically determines the next subtask by leveraging the full history of prior reasoning. By conditioning on past subtasks and their execution results, the generator avoids unproductive directions and enables non-linear exploration, allowing the current subtask to build upon any relevant previous step rather than strictly following the immediate predecessor. Formally, we represent the execu-tion history up to step t − 1 as Et−1 =[( T1, R 1), . . . , (Tt−1, R t−1)] , where each pair consists of a subtask Ti and its corresponding execution result Ri. The generator then produces the next subtask Tt as: 

Tt = Mgen (Q, Et−1). (3) Each generated subtask Tt is a structured repre-sentation that includes a natural-language descrip-tion, along with associated topic entities and can-didate predicates for retrieval, which facilitate sub-sequent code generation. Notably, each subtask maintains a parent step reference that specifies the earlier step on which it builds, enabling CoG to cap-ture complex, non-sequential dependencies beyond a strictly linear execution order. 

Evaluation. Following the initial generation and execution of the first subtask, the evaluator Meval 

determines at each subsequent iteration t > 1

whether further exploration is required. By as-sessing the previously proposed subtasks Tt−1 =[T1, . . . , T t−1] and the latest execution result Rt−1,the evaluator enables adaptive termination from two complementary perspectives: (1) Exploration Sufficiency : whether crucial subtasks decomposed from the question (e.g., subtasks that satisfy spe-cific constraints such as temporal qualifiers or su-perlatives) have been fully addressed; (2) Answer Plausibility : whether the most recent result Rt−1

is type-consistent and semantically aligned with the expected answer form (e.g., entity, numeric value, or date). Formally, at iteration t > 1, the evaluator predicts a binary continuation decision ct ∈{True , False } as: 

ct = Meval (Q, Tt−1, R t−1). (4) If ct = True , the process triggers the Generator to produce Tt; otherwise, the planning process termi-nates and proceeds to summarize the final answer. 

4.2 Coding 

To resolve each subtask Tt, the coding module fol-lows three sequential steps: subgraph retrieval ,schema-class mapping , and code generation . By compiling large-scale factual knowledge into con-cise schema-level Python classes, this module en-ables flexible reasoning through code generation. First, it extracts a relevant subgraph from the KG using the topic entities and candidate predicates associated with the subtask. Next, rather than han-dling raw triples, the module abstracts the retrieved schemas into Python class definitions. Finally, it generates executable code that instantiates these classes and performs logical operations to resolve the subtask. 

Subgraph Retrieval. Since reasoning over the entire knowledge graph G is computationally ex-pensive and prone to noise, this submodule re-trieves a compact subgraph Gsub ⊂ G based on the topic entities and predicates identified in the subtask Tt. Specifically, beginning from the anchor entities, the module performs a bounded expansion with a maximum depth d. To control the branch-ing factor, it considers both outgoing and incoming edges for each visited node, retaining only the top-

K edges per direction. This neighborhood selec-tion is guided by the semantic similarity between candidate relations and the combined context of the current subtask and its target predicates. An off-the-shelf, pre-trained DistilBERT model (Sanh et al., 2020) 2 is employed to compute these similar-ity scores. 

Schema-to-Class Mapping. A key idea in CoG is to transform retrieved KG structures into typed executable abstractions. Directly linearizing triples into text often obscures the graph structure and forces the model to reason over long, noisy con-texts. In contrast, CoG maps the retrieved subgraph into a compact set of Python classes, where entity types become classes and relations become typed attributes. This abstraction preserves the relational struc-ture of the KG while providing an explicit and reusable state representation for subsequent reason-ing. As a result, the model can manipulate KG facts through programmatic operations such as traversal, filtering, sorting, aggregation, and constraint check-ing, instead of relying on fragile natural-language descriptions of the same evidence. The mapping process is performed in two stages. First, for each predicate p within the retrieved sub-graph Gsub , the module utilizes schema constraints 

> 2https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/ msmarco-distilbert-base-tas-b

to infer the class types for the head and tail entities of each triple (h, p, t ). Subsequently, each inferred entity type is mapped to the corresponding Python 

class . For each predicate p, a member attribute is added to its corresponding domain class, where the values are instances of the range class. To accom-modate multi-valued relations, these attributes are represented as lists. Through this mapping, a large volume of raw triples is compressed into a compact set of typed class definitions. This representation preserves the relational structure of the knowledge graph while providing a programmatic interface for the subsequent code generation stage. Consequently, it significantly reduces the token footprint while maintaining high reasoning flexibility for complex queries. 

Code Generation. Based on the generated Python classes Ct, this step synthesizes the ex-ecutable logic required to resolve the subtask. Specifically, the LLM is prompted with the origi-nal question Q, the current subtask specification Tt

(comprising topic entities, predicates, and parent step references), and the class definitions Ct. The LLM generates Python code that resolves the sub-task primarily through entity traversal, constraint filtering, and data collection. The intermediate re-sults are stored in a predefined container (e.g., a results dictionary). Notably, the code generation process leverages the parent step reference in Tt

to access outputs from previous iterations, thereby facilitating non-linear reasoning. By operating over the abstract class interface rather than raw triples, the generated code remains concise and less prone to the hallucinations typi-cally associated with long-context factual injection. The final execution of this code yields the subtask result Rt, which is then appended to the execution trace Et.

4.3 Executing 

To obtain the execution result, the module provides an environment to instantiate the Python classes on Gsub and run the code on it. To ensure robust-ness, the module incorporates a self-correction loop that allows for iterative refinement of the generated logic based on runtime feedback. 

Instantiation and Execution. The execution is conducted within a restricted Python sandbox. For each subtask Tt, the executor primarily concate-nates the class definitions Ct, instantiation code, Method WebQSP CWQ GrailQA Overall I.I.D. Compositional Zero-shot                                                                                                       

> Fine-tuning Methods
> UniKGQA 77.2 51.2 ----TIARA 75.2 -73.0 87.8 69.2 68.0 KG-Agent 83.3 72.2 ----RoG 85.7 62.6 ----DeCAF 82.1 70.4 ----Pangu --75.4 84.4 74.6 71.6 FlexKBQA --62.8 71.3 59.1 60.6
> Prompting Methods
> IO Prompting + Qwen3-Coder-30B-A3B 63.1 42.6 33.4 33.5 23.0 37.1 IO Prompting + DeepSeek-V3.2 75.3 52.9 35.7 34.8 26.0 39.6 Readi + GPT-4.1-mini 80.9 60.2 71.7 67.5 60.1 77.6 ReKnoS + GPT-4o-mini 83.8 66.8 80.5 ---SRP + GPT-4.1-mini 83.6 69.0 78.8 75.8 62.6 85.8 PoG + Qwen3-Coder-30B-A3B 82.9 64.1 76.8 77.9 61.1 81.9 PoG + DeepSeek-V3.2 83.9 72.6 71.6 68.4 56.4 78.3 CoG + Qwen3-Coder-30B-A3B 76.0 60.8 82.0 82.5 77.9 83.2 CoG + GPT-4.1-mini 85.4 72.2 89.4 89.0 83.6 91.6 CoG + DeepSeek-V3.2 88.7 79.1 91.0 90.5 84.2 93.5

Table 1: Main experimental results on WebQSP, CWQ, and GrailQA. The GrailQA results are broken down into Overall, I.I.D., Compositional, and Zero-shot splits. 

and the operation code. During execution, en-tities are instantiated into Python objects, and their attributes are populated according to the re-trieved triples in Gsub . This process produces an in-memory object set Ot that supports direct at-tribute traversal, effectively aligning graph-based reasoning with object-oriented execution. The executor returns either a valid result Rt or an error feedback signal fb (e.g., an exception trace-back). Notably, CoG treats an empty result as a fail-ure case, as it typically indicates a logical mismatch between the generated code and the underlying KG constraints. 

Self-correction and Early Termination. Upon receiving an execution failure or an empty output, the feedback fb is fed back to the LLM to trigger code regeneration. This self-correction loop contin-ues for up to N retries. If a valid result Rt is still unobtainable after N attempts, the system performs an early termination and returns the most recent successful candidate answer, thereby preventing unproductive reasoning cycles. Otherwise, a suc-cessful pair (Tt, R t) is appended to the execution trace Et.

5 Experiments 

5.1 Experimental Setups Datasets and Evaluation Metric. To evaluate the effectiveness of CoG on complex KG reasoning, we conduct experiments on three widely used multi-hop KGQA datasets: WebQSP (Yih et al., 2016), CWQ (Talmor and Berant, 2018), and GrailQA (Gu et al., 2021), all based on Freebase (Bollacker et al., 2008). For GrailQA, we select the same test sub-set as used in ToG and PoG to ensure consistency across experiments. In line with prior work (Sun et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024a; Xu et al., 2024), we report exact match accuracy (Hits@1) as our primary metric. Further details on the datasets can be found in Table 3. 

Implementation Details. Since the baseline methods employ different backbone models, we select Qwen3-Coder-30B-A3B (Yang et al., 2025), DeepSeek-V3.2 (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025), and GPT-4.1-mini (OpenAI, 2025) for a fairer compar-ison. For subtask decomposition, we use a tem-perature of 1.2 to encourage exploration, while the evaluation module employs a temperature of 0 to ensure strict consistency. Code generation and cor-rection are performed with a temperature of 0.3 to yield stable and reliable outputs. The exploration depth is set to 2 to cover complete CVT relations, and the breadth is set to 8 (i.e., up to 8 incom-ing/outgoing edges per hop). 

Baselines. We compare CoG against two main categories of methods: fine-tuning methods and prompting methods. For the former, we choose UniKGQA (Jiang et al., 2023b), TIARA (Shu et al., 2022), KG-Agent (Jiang et al., 2024), RoG (Luo et al., 2024b), DeCAF (Yu et al., 2023), Pangu (Gu et al., 2023), and FlexKBQA (Li et al., 2024b) as baselines. For the latter, we choose IO prompting (i.e., the model directly answers questions given some examples) (Cahyawijaya et al., 2024), Readi (Cheng et al., 2024), ReKnoS (Wang et al., 2025), SRP (Zhu et al., 2025), and PoG (Chen et al., 2024a) for comparison. Appendix C provides de-scriptions of the baselines, and Table 5 compares several other baseline methods. 

5.2 Main Results 

As shown in Table 1, we compare CoG with base-line methods on three widely used datasets. Over-all, CoG consistently achieves the best performance across all three datasets, outperforming both fine-tuning and prompting-based approaches. 

Schema-level coding enhances the manipula-tion of large-scale factual knowledge . Compared to prompting methods like PoG, ReKnoS, and SRP, which rely on reasoning over raw or pruned factual triples, CoG can process a larger volume of evi-dence programmatically within a compact context by instantiating facts into class structures. This ap-proach significantly enhances fact manipulation ca-pabilities. On the complex multi-hop CWQ dataset, CoG with DeepSeek-V3.2 achieves 79.1% Hits@1, which represents a 6.5% absolute improvement over PoG. 

Flexible schema-level coding enhances gen-eralization ability . Unlike frameworks such as KG-Agent or Readi, which are restricted by a fixed set of predefined operators, CoG’s schema-level code generation allows the model to generalize to diverse and novel reasoning patterns that static tool-use paradigms cannot accommodate. CoG demon-strates exceptional generalization in the composi-tional and zero-shot settings of GrailQA. Specifi-cally, CoG with GPT-4.1-mini outperforms Readi by a margin of 23.5% on the compositional subset. On the zero-shot subset, the performance lead over Readi reaches 14.0%. 

Backbone capability significantly impacts per-formance . CoG’s performance is strongly corre-lated with the underlying model’s ability to com-prehend complex schemas and generate object-oriented code. Owing to the robust workflow de-sign and schema-level coding, CoG achieves com-petitive results using the Qwen3-Coder-30B-A3B backbone. Meanwhile, the highest performance is reached with powerful backbones like DeepSeek-V3.2. This indicates that CoG’s ceiling scales with the model’s programming proficiency; at the same time, its core mechanism of mapping schemas to classes effectively unlocks structured reasoning po-tential across a wide range of LLM capabilities. 

5.3 Ablation Study 

Experiments are performed on three datasets us-ing DeepSeek-V3.2 as the backbone model. The results are shown in Table 2. w/o Iterative Plan-ning denotes using pre-decomposed subtasks in-stead of dynamic subtasks for each question. w/o Error Correction indicates disabling the code cor-rection mechanism and no longer adjusting based on execution feedback from encountered errors. w/o Code Reasoning represents directly injecting triples/facts into prompts instead of using code gen-eration. Since the number of triples can be ex-tremely large—potentially exceeding the context limits of the LLM—we select up to 500 triples most relevant to each subtask based on similarity, aiming to match the token volume used in CoG. w/ JSON Abstraction refers to replacing Python class definitions for triple schema structure with JSON-formatted representations. The ablation results show that each component contributes to the overall performance of CoG. Specifically, removing itera-tive planning degrades performance because com-plex KGQA questions often require adaptive de-composition based on intermediate results. More-over, disabling error correction significantly de-grades performance, showing that executable rea-soning benefits from feedback-driven refinement. Replacing code-based reasoning with direct fact injection also leads to clear drops, suggesting that explicit programmatic manipulation of structured knowledge is more reliable than reasoning over long serialized triples. Replacing Python classes with JSON format results in a minor performance drop, suggesting that LLMs have a strong under-standing of both Python class structures and JSON formats. Method / Variant WebQSP CWQ GrailQA CoG 88.7 79.1 91.0 

w/o Iterative Planning 81.7 75.1 88.9 w/o Error Correction 85.9 67.5 85.9 w/o Code Reasoning 84.9 70.5 81.6 w/ JSON Abstraction 88.4 76.4 87.2 

Table 2: Ablation study on three datasets. 

5.4 Efficiency Study 

We further analyze runtime efficiency to examine whether CoG can scale factual knowledge opera-tions without incurring excessive inference over-head. Beyond standard measures such as the num-ber of LLM calls, token consumption, and time consumption, we introduce Token Utility Rate 

(TUR ) to measure the average number of facts that can be processed per token (including both input and output tokens). Intuitively, TUR captures the amount of useful factual information processed per token, providing a more direct view of whether additional token usage translates into greater fac-tual reasoning capacity. Due to space limitations, we defer the formal definition, counting rules, and calculation protocol of TUR to Appendix D. As shown in Table 4, CoG achieves compara-ble efficiency to PoG in terms of token consump-tion and runtime, rather than consistently reducing these costs. Nevertheless, under comparable token and time budgets, CoG operates on substantially more factual knowledge. On CWQ, CoG operates on 20,276 fact units per question, compared with 408 for PoG, while using a similar number of to-kens and slightly less runtime, yielding a 40 .7×

TUR gain. Similar trends appear on WebQSP and GrailQA, where CoG processes 11,213 and 8,148 fact units, achieving 47 .2× and 47 .6× higher TUR, respectively. CoG also consistently reduces LLM calls across datasets, from 25.1 to 7.0 on CWQ, 13.0 to 3.8 on WebQSP, and 7.5 to 4.2 on GrailQA. These results indicate that CoG can coordinate sub-stantially larger factual knowledge spaces through LLM-generated code, while maintaining efficient inference and avoiding prohibitive context or run-time overhead. 

5.5 Case Study 

As shown in Figure 3, we present an example to compare the reasoning processes and results of PoG and CoG. The complex question "Who was the Governor of Ohio that held his position be-fore 2011-01-10?" involves two subtasks: "Find Who was the Governor of Ohio that held his position before     

> 2011 -1-10?
> Ohio
> governing CVT
> CVT
> holder
> holder
> ...
> title
> Governor
> Governor
> hold_from
> hold_to
> Ted Strickland
> 2007 -01 -08
> 2011 -01 -10
> represent CVT
> holder
> hold_from
> hold_to
> George Voinovich
> 1999 -01 -03
> 2011 -01 -03

KG 

PoG 

CoG    

> Ohio represent CVT
> holder
> hold_from
> hold_to
> George Voinovich
> 1999 -01 -03
> 2011 -01 -03
> Subtask 1: Find the governors of Ohio.

Q

Sub -

tasks Subtask 2: Filter for whose term started before 2011 -01 -10.                

> Answer :[Since there is a large amount of information about Ohio, PoG
> performed extensive pruning. However, this ultimately led to the loss of
> critical information and reasoning errors.] Based on knowledge triplets,
> the answer is George Voinovich .
> Reasoning
> Answer :[After abstracting a large number of triple facts into classes, the
> context length was reduced, and through code reasoning, the correct
> answer was ultimately obtained.] The execution result is Ted Strickland .
> Reasoning
> State* governing CVT*
> holder
> hold_from
> hold_to
> Holder*
> Datetime*
> Datetime*
> title Title*
> ...
> Texas
> governing
> represent ...
> ...
> (Ohio, Texas...)
> (Ted, John...)
> (2011, 1999...)
> (Governor,Senator...)
> for entity in entities:
> if(entity.State == Ohio and
> entity.CVT.title == Governor and
> entity.CVT.hold_from < 2011 -01 -10):
> answer.add (entity.CVT.Holder)
> governing ... ...

Figure 3: An example for comparing PoG and CoG in answering complex questions. 

the governors of Ohio" and "Filter for those whose term started before 2011-01-10". The KG contains extensive information about Ohio and its office-holders. When faced with such a large number of facts, PoG reduces the reasoning context by exten-sively pruning, which ultimately leads to the loss of critical information and results in errors. In con-trast, CoG abstracts entities into a small number of class structures and performs reasoning via code generation and execution. This design preserves key information and substantially reduces the rea-soning context, ultimately leading to the correct answer. To further demonstrate the flexibility of our method, Appendix G presents a comparison with methods relying on predefined tools on questions selected from WebQSP. The results highlight the strong flexibility of our approach while revealing the limitations of predefined tool-based methods. 

6 Conclusion 

In this paper, we introduced a novel LLM-KG framework named Code-on-Graph (CoG), which enhances the reasoning capabilities of LLMs by incorporating KGs. Specifically, we designed CoG to address complex problems through an iterative process of Planning, Coding, and Executing. Ex-tensive experiments demonstrated the effectiveness and efficiency of CoG, which achieved state-of-the-art performance without any fine-tuning. Limitations 

CoG can better leverage the programming capabili-ties of large language models to construct diverse operators for solving complex question-answering tasks. However, its performance is still constrained by the coding strength of the underlying model. When instantiated with a comparatively less power-ful coding model such as Qwen3-Coder-30B-A3B, the advantages of CoG are not fully manifested. In addition, our experiments only cover a lim-ited subset of LLMs. More state-of-the-art LLMs should be further studied. 

References 

Sören Auer, Christian Bizer, Georgi Kobilarov, Jens Lehmann, Richard Cyganiak, and Zachary G. Ives. 2007. Dbpedia: A nucleus for a web of open data. In 

The Semantic Web, 6th International Semantic Web Conference, 2nd Asian Semantic Web Conference, ISWC 2007 + ASWC 2007, Busan, Korea, Novem-ber 11-15, 2007 , volume 4825 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 722–735. Springer. Kurt D. Bollacker, Colin Evans, Praveen K. Paritosh, Tim Sturge, and Jamie Taylor. 2008. Freebase: a collaboratively created graph database for structuring human knowledge. In Proceedings of the ACM SIG-MOD International Conference on Management of Data, SIGMOD 2008, Vancouver, BC, Canada, June 10-12, 2008 , pages 1247–1250. ACM. Samuel Cahyawijaya, Holy Lovenia, and Pascale Fung. 2024. LLMs are few-shot in-context low-resource language learners. In Proceedings of the 2024 Con-ference of the North American Chapter of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-guage Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 405–433, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Liyi Chen, Panrong Tong, Zhongming Jin, Ying Sun, Jieping Ye, and Hui Xiong. 2024a. Plan-on-graph: Self-correcting adaptive planning of large language model on knowledge graphs. Preprint ,arXiv:2410.23875. Wenhu Chen, Xueguang Ma, Xinyi Wang, and William W. Cohen. 2023. Program of thoughts prompting: Disentangling computation from rea-soning for numerical reasoning tasks. Preprint ,arXiv:2211.12588. Zhuo Chen, Fei Wang, Zixuan Li, Zhao Zhang, Weiwei Ding, Chuanguang Yang, Yongjun Xu, and Xiaolong Jin. 2026. Incentivizing agentic reasoning capability with outcome supervision for knowledge base ques-tion answering. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2026 , WWW ’26, page 4302–4313, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machin-ery. Zhuo Chen, Zhao Zhang, Zixuan Li, Fei Wang, Yutao Zeng, Xiaolong Jin, and Yongjun Xu. 2024b. Self-improvement programming for temporal knowledge graph question answering. In Proceedings of the 2024 Joint International Conference on Computa-tional Linguistics, Language Resources and Evalua-tion (LREC-COLING 2024) , pages 14579–14594. Sitao Cheng, Ziyuan Zhuang, Yong Xu, Fangkai Yang, Chaoyun Zhang, Xiaoting Qin, Xiang Huang, Ling Chen, Qingwei Lin, Dongmei Zhang, Saravan Rajmo-han, and Qi Zhang. 2024. Call me when necessary: Llms can efficiently and faithfully reason over struc-tured environments. Preprint , arXiv:2403.08593. Zhoujun Cheng, Tianbao Xie, Peng Shi, Chengzu Li, Rahul Nadkarni, Yushi Hu, Caiming Xiong, Dragomir Radev, Mari Ostendorf, Luke Zettlemoyer, Noah A. Smith, and Tao Yu. 2023. Binding lan-guage models in symbolic languages. Preprint ,arXiv:2210.02875. DeepSeek-AI, Aixin Liu, Aoxue Mei, Bangcai Lin, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bingzheng Xu, Bochao Wu, Bowei Zhang, Chaofan Lin, Chen Dong, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chen-hao Xu, Chong Ruan, Damai Dai, Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, and 245 others. 2025. Deepseek-v3.2: Pushing the frontier of open large language models. Preprint ,arXiv:2512.02556. Zixuan Dong, Baoyun Peng, Yufei Wang, Jia Fu, Xi-aodong Wang, Yongxue Shan, and Xin Zhou. 2024. Effiqa: Efficient question-answering with strate-gic multi-model collaboration on knowledge graphs. 

Preprint , arXiv:2406.01238. Guangze Gao, Zixuan Li, Chunfeng Yuan, Jiawei Li, Wu Jianzhuo, Yuehao Zhang, Xiaolong Jin, Bing Li, and Weiming Hu. 2025. D-rag: Differentiable retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge graph question answering. In Proceedings of the 2025 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 35386–35405. Luyu Gao, Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Pengfei Liu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and Gra-ham Neubig. 2023. Pal: Program-aided language models. Preprint , arXiv:2211.10435. Yu Gu, Xiang Deng, and Yu Su. 2023. Don’t gen-erate, discriminate: A proposal for grounding lan-guage models to real-world environments. Preprint ,arXiv:2212.09736. Yu Gu, Sue Kase, Michelle Vanni, Brian Sadler, Percy Liang, Xifeng Yan, and Yu Su. 2021. Beyond i.i.d.: Three levels of generalization for question answering on knowledge bases. In Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021 , page 3477–3488. ACM. Yucan Guo, Zixuan Li, Xiaolong Jin, Yantao Liu, Yu-tao Zeng, Wenxuan Liu, Xiang Li, Pan Yang, Long Bai, Jiafeng Guo, and 1 others. 2024. Retrieval-augmented code generation for universal information extraction. In CCF International Conference on Nat-ural Language Processing and Chinese Computing ,pages 30–42. Springer. Xiaoxin He, Yijun Tian, Yifei Sun, Nitesh V. Chawla, Thomas Laurent, Yann LeCun, Xavier Bresson, and Bryan Hooi. 2024. G-retriever: Retrieval-augmented generation for textual graph understanding and ques-tion answering. Preprint , arXiv:2402.07630. Xiang Huang, Sitao Cheng, Yuheng Bao, Shanshan Huang, and Yuzhong Qu. 2023. MarkQA: A large scale KBQA dataset with numerical reasoning. In 

Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 10241–10259, Singapore. Association for Compu-tational Linguistics. Jinhao Jiang, Kun Zhou, Zican Dong, Keming Ye, Wayne Xin Zhao, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2023a. Struct-gpt: A general framework for large language model to reason over structured data. Preprint ,arXiv:2305.09645. Jinhao Jiang, Kun Zhou, Wayne Xin Zhao, Yang Song, Chen Zhu, Hengshu Zhu, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2024. Kg-agent: An efficient autonomous agent frame-work for complex reasoning over knowledge graph. 

Preprint , arXiv:2402.11163. Jinhao Jiang, Kun Zhou, Wayne Xin Zhao, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2023b. Unikgqa: Unified retrieval and reason-ing for solving multi-hop question answering over knowledge graph. Preprint , arXiv:2212.00959. Tianle Li, Xueguang Ma, Alex Zhuang, Yu Gu, Yu Su, and Wenhu Chen. 2023a. Few-shot in-context learn-ing for knowledge base question answering. Preprint ,arXiv:2305.01750. Xiaoxi Li, Yujia Zhou, and Zhicheng Dou. 2023b. Uni-gen: A unified generative framework for retrieval and question answering with large language models. 

Preprint , arXiv:2312.11036. Yading Li, Dandan Song, Changzhi Zhou, Yuhang Tian, Hao Wang, Ziyi Yang, and Shuhao Zhang. 2024a. A framework of knowledge graph-enhanced large language model based on question decomposition and atomic retrieval. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 11472–11485, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Zhenyu Li, Sunqi Fan, Yu Gu, Xiuxing Li, Zhichao Duan, Bowen Dong, Ning Liu, and Jianyong Wang. 2024b. Flexkbqa: A flexible llm-powered frame-work for few-shot knowledge base question answer-ing. Preprint , arXiv:2308.12060. Zixuan Li, Wenxuan Liu, Long Bai, Chunmao Zhang, Wei Li, Fenghui Zhang, Quanxin Jin, Ruoyun He, Zhuo Chen, Zhilei Hu, and 1 others. 2025. Knowcoder-v2: Deep knowledge analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.06881 .Zixuan Li, Yutao Zeng, Yuxin Zuo, Weicheng Ren, Wenxuan Liu, Miao Su, Yucan Guo, Yantao Liu, Xi-ang Li, Zhilei Hu, and 1 others. 2024c. Knowcoder: Coding structured knowledge into llms for univer-sal information extraction. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 8758–8779. Wenxuan Liu, Zixuan Li, Long Bai, Chunmao Zhang, Fenghui Zhang, Zhuo Chen, Wei Li, Yuxin Zuo, Fei Wang, Bingbing Xu, and 1 others. 2026. Towards knowledgeable deep research: Framework and bench-mark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.07720 .Pan Lu, Baolin Peng, Hao Cheng, Michel Galley, Kai-Wei Chang, Ying Nian Wu, Song-Chun Zhu, and Jianfeng Gao. 2023. Chameleon: Plug-and-play compositional reasoning with large language models. 

Preprint , arXiv:2304.09842. Haoran Luo, Haihong E, Zichen Tang, Shiyao Peng, Yikai Guo, Wentai Zhang, Chenghao Ma, Guant-ing Dong, Meina Song, Wei Lin, Yifan Zhu, and Anh Tuan Luu. 2024a. ChatKBQA: A generate-then-retrieve framework for knowledge base question an-swering with fine-tuned large language models. In 

Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: ACL 2024 , pages 2039–2056, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Linhao Luo, Yuan-Fang Li, Gholamreza Haffari, and Shirui Pan. 2024b. Reasoning on graphs: Faithful and interpretable large language model reasoning. 

Preprint , arXiv:2310.01061. OpenAI. 2025. Introducing gpt-4.1 in the api. https: //openai.com/index/gpt-4-1/ .Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and Thomas Wolf. 2020. Distilbert, a distilled version of bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. Preprint ,arXiv:1910.01108. Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools. 

Preprint , arXiv:2302.04761. Jie Shi, Bo Xu, Jiaqing Liang, Yanghua Xiao, Jia Chen, Chenhao Xie, Peng Wang, and Wei Wang. 2025. Gen-SQL: Efficient text-to-SQL by bridging nat-ural language question and database schema with pseudo-schema. In Proceedings of the 31st Inter-national Conference on Computational Linguistics ,pages 3794–3807, Abu Dhabi, UAE. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yiheng Shu, Zhiwei Yu, Yuhan Li, Börje F. Karlsson, Tingting Ma, Yuzhong Qu, and Chin-Yew Lin. 2022. Tiara: Multi-grained retrieval for robust question answering over large knowledge bases. Preprint ,arXiv:2210.12925. Jiashuo Sun, Chengjin Xu, Lumingyuan Tang, Saizhuo Wang, Chen Lin, Yeyun Gong, Lionel M. Ni, Heung-Yeung Shum, and Jian Guo. 2024. Think-on-graph: Deep and responsible reasoning of large language model on knowledge graph. Preprint ,arXiv:2307.07697. Dídac Surís, Sachit Menon, and Carl Vondrick. 2023. Vipergpt: Visual inference via python execution for reasoning. Preprint , arXiv:2303.08128. Alon Talmor and Jonathan Berant. 2018. The web as a knowledge-base for answering complex questions. 

Preprint , arXiv:1803.06643. Lei Wang, Yi Hu, Jiabang He, Xing Xu, Ning Liu, Hui Liu, and Heng Tao Shen. 2023. T-sciq: Teaching multimodal chain-of-thought reasoning via mixed large language model signals for science question answering. Preprint , arXiv:2305.03453. Song Wang, Junhong Lin, Xiaojie Guo, Julian Shun, Jundong Li, and Yada Zhu. 2025. Reasoning of large language models over knowledge graphs with super-relations. Preprint , arXiv:2503.22166. Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny Zhou. 2023. Chain-of-thought prompting elic-its reasoning in large language models. Preprint ,arXiv:2201.11903. Yao Xu, Shizhu He, Jiabei Chen, Zihao Wang, Yangqiu Song, Hanghang Tong, Guang Liu, Kang Liu, and Jun Zhao. 2024. Generate-on-graph: Treat llm as both agent and kg in incomplete knowledge graph question answering. Preprint , arXiv:2404.14741. An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, Chujie Zheng, Day-iheng Liu, Fan Zhou, Fei Huang, Feng Hu, Hao Ge, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jialong Tang, and 41 others. 2025. Qwen3 technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2505.09388. Xi Ye, Semih Yavuz, Kazuma Hashimoto, Yingbo Zhou, and Caiming Xiong. 2022. RNG-KBQA: Generation augmented iterative ranking for knowledge base ques-tion answering. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 6032–6043, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Wen-tau Yih, Matthew Richardson, Chris Meek, Ming-Wei Chang, and Jina Suh. 2016. The value of se-mantic parse labeling for knowledge base question answering. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) , pages 201–206, Berlin, Germany. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Donghan Yu, Sheng Zhang, Patrick Ng, Henghui Zhu, Alexander Hanbo Li, Jun Wang, Yiqun Hu, William Wang, Zhiguo Wang, and Bing Xiang. 2023. De-caf: Joint decoding of answers and logical forms for question answering over knowledge bases. Preprint ,arXiv:2210.00063. Wayne Xin Zhao, Kun Zhou, Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Xiaolei Wang, Yupeng Hou, Yingqian Min, Beichen Zhang, Junjie Zhang, Zican Dong, Yifan Du, Chen Yang, Yushuo Chen, Zhipeng Chen, Jinhao Jiang, Ruiyang Ren, Yifan Li, Xinyu Tang, Zikang Liu, and 3 others. 2025. A survey of large language models. 

Preprint , arXiv:2303.18223. Jiajun Zhu, Ye Liu, Meikai Bao, Kai Zhang, Yang-hai Zhang, and Qi Liu. 2025. Self-reflective plan-ning with knowledge graphs: Enhancing llm rea-soning reliability for question answering. Preprint ,arXiv:2505.19410. Yuxin Zuo, Wenxuan Jiang, Wenxuan Liu, Zixuan Li, Long Bai, Hanbin Wang, Yutao Zeng, Xiaolong Jin, Jiafeng Guo, and Xueqi Cheng. 2025. Knowcoder-x: Boosting multilingual information extraction via code. In Findings of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 14486–14509. 

Appendix A Dataset Details                 

> Dataset Answer Format Train Test KB
> WebQSP Entity/Number 3,098 1,639 Freebase CWQ Entity 27,734 3,531 Freebase GrailQA Entity/Number 44,337 1,000 Freebase

Table 3: Dataset Statistics. Due to the large size of the GrailQA test set (6,763 samples) and the associated computational costs, we follow the practice of ToG and PoG by using the same randomly selected subset of 1,000 samples for our evaluation. 

In this work, we employ three complex multi-hop KGQA datasets: WebQSP (WebQuestionsSP) (Yih et al., 2016), ComplexWebQuestions (CWQ) (Talmor and Berant, 2018), and GrailQA (Gu et al., 2021). Table 3 summarizes their key statistics. 

WebQSP consists of questions from WebQues-tions that are answerable via Freebase. The dataset evaluates I.I.D. generalization, containing 34 logi-cal form templates and involving 2,461 entities. It defines 628 relations in total. 

ComplexWebQuestions (CWQ) extends We-bQSP by introducing four categories of complex questions: conjunction, composition, comparative, and superlative. It is structured over 174 logical form templates, includes 11,422 entities, and cov-ers 845 relations. 

GrailQA is a large-scale and diverse KGQA benchmark constructed on Freebase, designed to evaluate model generalization across three distinct subsets based on different settings: I.I.D., composi-tional, and zero-shot. 

B Prompts 

Figure 4 presents the prompts related to the plan-ning stage, and Figure 5 presents the prompts re-lated to the coding and executing stages. 

C Baseline Descriptions 

In this section, we provide supplementary intro-ductions to baseline methods used for comparison. We categorize them into two groups: Fine-tuning Methods and Prompting Methods. 

C.1 Fine-tuning Methods UniKGQA (Jiang et al., 2023b) integrates re-trieval and reasoning into a single model archi-tecture, utilizing a pre-trained language model for semantic matching between questions and relations, and a matching information propagation module to diffuse relevance signals across the graph. To han-dle different search scales, the approach introduces abstract subgraphs during retrieval to reduce node complexity. The model is trained via shared pre-training on question-relation matching and stage-specific fine-tuning, effectively bridging the gap between retrieval and reasoning while addressing the challenge of scalable multi-hop QA over large KGs. 

TIARA (Shu et al., 2022) enhances pre-trained LMs with multi-grained retrieval from knowledge bases. It retrieves relevant entities, exemplary log-ical forms, and schema items to provide both se-mantic and structural context for question answer-ing. The approach further employs constrained decoding during generation to ensure syntactic and semantic correctness of logical forms, addressing challenges in grounding and generalization over large KBs. 

KG-Agent (Jiang et al., 2024) is an autonomous agent framework that enables smaller LLMs (e.g., LLaMA-7B) to perform complex multi-hop rea-soning over KGs. The framework integrates a tuned LLM as a planner, a multifunctional tool-box for KG operations, a KG-based executor, and a knowledge memory module. It employs code-based instruction tuning synthesized from existing KGQA datasets to teach the LLM to autonomously select tools and iteratively reason over KG struc-tures. This approach addresses the limitations of predefined LLM-KG interaction strategies and re-duces dependency on large, closed-source LLMs. 

RoG (Luo et al., 2024b) synergizes LLMs with KGs to address the issues of hallucination and lack of up-to-date knowledge in LLM reasoning. It in-troduces a planning-retrieval-reasoning framework where RoG first generates relation paths grounded by KGs as faithful plans, then retrieves correspond-ing reasoning paths from KGs, and finally conducts interpretable reasoning based on these retrieved paths. By distilling structural knowledge from KGs into the LLM through instruction tuning, RoG en-ables faithful and interpretable multi-hop reasoning while maintaining the flexibility to integrate with arbitrary LLMs during inference. 

DecAF (Yu et al., 2023) jointly decodes both logical forms and direct answers within a unified retrieval-augmented sequence-to-sequence model. It linearizes the knowledge base into text passages and employs either sparse (BM25) or dense (DPR) retrieval to fetch relevant context, instead of rely-ing on dedicated entity linking. Using a shared T5-based reader with task-specific prefixes, the model generates logical forms and answers in paral-lel. The final answer is determined by prioritizing executable logical-form answers when available, otherwise falling back to the directly generated answer. This approach effectively combines the precision of semantic parsing with the robustness of direct generation, while simplifying adaptation across datasets by eliminating the need for special-ized entity linking components. 

Pangu (Gu et al., 2023) leverages LMs primarily as discriminators rather than generators. In this framework, a symbolic agent interacts with the en-vironment to incrementally enumerate and search for valid, executable candidate plans. The neural LM is employed to score and rank these candidate plans based on their plausibility with respect to the input natural language utterance, guiding the search process. This approach shifts the burden of ensuring grammatical correctness and environ-mental faithfulness from the LM to the agent, ef-fectively addressing key challenges in grounding language to complex, real-world environments. 

FlexKBQA (Li et al., 2024b) first samples di-verse, executable programs (e.g., SPARQL queries) Task Evaluation Prompt 

You are an expert in navigating, interpreting, and performing complex reasoning over structured 

knowledge bases. 

Given a question, its task history, and results, you must generate the next task by thinking step by 

step and outputting in JSON format. 

JSON format: 

- thought: your thinking process 

- step: int, refers to the subtask index 

- task: next task 

- predicates: list, potentially semantically related predicates in the knowledge base 

- topic_mids: list, max length of 2, the mids of topic entities from provided to complete the 

subtask 

- parent_step: int list, the origin of current task from previous step, empty array if no parent 

task 

Please follow the rules: 

1. For ambiguous questions, you may rewrite the query by connecting alternatives with "or" to cover 

as many potential queries as possible. 

2. Before generating the subtask, you must think briefly about the question. 

3. topic_mids should ONLY be selected from the provided topic entities. 

Examples for task decomposition sequence: 

<Examples> 

Question: <Question> 

Provided topic entities: <Topic Entities> 

Previous Steps: <Previous Steps> 

You are an expert in navigating, interpreting, and performing complex reasoning over structured 

knowledge bases. 

Given a Question, a Trajectory (the previous reasoning steps), and the Current Answers, your task is 

to decide whether further exploration is required. 

You must output a JSON object in the following format: 

{

"continue": <true or false>, // boolean value, whether more exploration is needed 

"reason": "<brief explanation>" // why to continue or stop 

}

Requirements: 

- 'reason' must be concise, and must justify the decision by jointly considering: 

1. the difficulty of the question (e.g., presence of constraints, multi -hop requirements) 

2. the soundness of the current responses (whether they match the question intent) 

3. the sufficiency of the exploration so far (whether key constraints were checked) 

- The explanation should reflect whether: 

1. the current responses satisfy the required constraints 

2. the trajectory includes both the necessary reasoning steps 

3. additional exploration is needed to resolve missing or unexamined conditions 

Below are examples for reference: 

<Examples> 

Your task: 

Question: <Question> 

Trajectory: <Trajectory> 

Current responses: <Current Responses> 

Task Decomposition Prompt Figure 4: Task decomposition and evaluation prompts. Code Generation Prompt 

You are good at coding. 

Given a task and relevant Python classes, you must generate simple and efficient Python code between 

'# Your code starts here:' and '# Your code ends here:' to complete the task. 

Rules: 

1. CVT's '_mid' is NOT ALLOWED to be collected as a result since CVT refers to an intermediate entity. 

2. If a short explanation is needed, it should be in a code comment. 

3. All attributes are of String type, such as the '_value' of the 'Date' class, e.g., '"2002 -06 -05"'. 

4. If you think the task is ambiguous, you can make multiple attempts and ensure you explore 

potential correct results. 

5. You must traverse all entities completely (use 'break' statements with caution) to avoid missing 

potential answers. 

6. When traversing all entities and using '_mid' for judgment, you must first check for the presence 

of the attribute using 'hasattr' or 'isinstance', as not all classes have the '_mid' attribute. 

7. Reading the comments on class attributes before coding is highly recommended. 

Result Format: 

1. All results must be collected in 'result_dict'. Additionally, always collect the entity's '_mid' 

and '_name' in 'result_dict['detailed_results']'. '_mid' can be directly obtained from the predefined 

'mid_name_map'. 

2. If the query concerns a literal, date, number, etc., you should also collect them in 

'result_dict["direct_results"]’. 

Examples: 

<Examples> 

Your task: 

Question: <Question> 

Task: <Task> 

Topic entities: <Topic entities> 

Code: <Classes Defination Code> 

Code Correction Prompt 

You are good at logic analysis and coding. You aim to fix a specific program to complete the task. 

Rules: 

1. CVT's '_mid' is NOT ALLOWED to be collected as a result since CVT refers to an intermediate 

entity. 

2. If a short explanation is needed, it should be in a code comment. 

3. All attributes are of String type, such as the '_value' of the 'Date' class, e.g., '"2002 -06 -05"'. 

4. If you think the task is ambiguous, you can make multiple attempts and ensure you explore 

potential correct results. 

5. You must traverse all entities completely (use 'break' statements with caution) to avoid missing 

potential answers. 

6. When traversing all entities and using '_mid' for judgment, you must first check for the presence 

of the attribute using 'hasattr' or 'isinstance', as not all classes have the '_mid' attribute. 

7. Reading the comments on class attributes before coding is highly recommended. 

Result Format: 

1. All results must be collected in 'result_dict'. Additionally, always collect the entity's '_mid' 

and '_name' in 'result_dict['detailed_results']'. '_mid' can be directly obtained from the 

predefined 'mid_name_map'. 

2. If the query concerns a literal, date, number, etc., you should also collect them in 

'result_dict["direct_results"]’. 

Potential errors for reference: 

1. Forging entity's mid: Do not use the mid of a topic entity that has not been provided. 

2. Logical error: Simply revise the logic. 

3. Taking the _value (instead of _mid) of the entity as result: You should use only the '_mid' as 

result. 

4. Repeatedly searching for the answer from the previous step: The relevant constraints from the 

previous step have already been completed, and in the current step, these repetitive steps must be 

skipped to explore or apply new constraints. 

5. Conditional judgment exits prematurely: Member variables receive lists of entities; as long as 

one entity meets the condition, it is considered satisfied. Premature breaks should be avoided. 

6. Overly precise _value matching: String equality matching is a very strict; the matching criteria 

can be appropriately relaxed, and multiple fuzzy matching patterns can be added for date, number, 

and code matching, etc. 

7. Reverse relation: Use the wrong the direction of the relation. Such as (contained by, contain), 

(sub, parent), ect. 

8. Detailed results key error: The key in detailed_results should be a certain mid. 

Examples: 

<Examples> 

Your task: 

Question: <Question> 

Task: <Task> 

Topic entities: <Topic entities> 

Code to be fixed: <Code> Figure 5: Code generation and correction prompts. from the knowledge base and uses LLMs to con-vert them into natural language questions, gener-ating a synthetic dataset for training a lightweight model. To bridge the distribution gap between syn-thetic data and real user questions, it introduces an execution-guided self-training method that it-eratively annotates unlabeled user queries. Addi-tionally, the framework incorporates the inherent reasoning capability of LLMs to further enhance robustness and coverage, thereby reducing reliance on extensive manual annotations while maintaining performance across different domains and query languages. 

C.2 Prompting Methods IO Prompting refers to the approach of provid-ing the LLM with several question-answer exem-plars and directly prompting it to generate answers. This method relies solely on the internal knowledge of the large model without introducing additional knowledge for assistance. It is prone to generating hallucinations and suffering from outdated knowl-edge, highlighting the limitations of LLM-based question answering. 

Readi (Cheng et al., 2024) is a framework for efficient and faithful reasoning of LLMs over struc-tured environments like knowledge graphs and ta-bles. It leverages the intrinsic planning ability of LLMs to generate an initial reasoning path, which is then directly instantiated on the environment. By invoking LLMs for path editing only when instanti-ation fails, Readi reduces iterative LLM calls while using instantiation feedback—such as error loca-tions and candidate relations—to guide corrections. This approach enables LLMs to reason over large-scale structured data with fewer interactions while maintaining grounding fidelity. 

ReKnoS (Wang et al., 2025) is a novel reason-ing framework that enhances the ability of LLMs to perform multi-hop reasoning over knowledge graphs by leveraging the concept of super-relations. Super-relations are groups of semantically related fine-grained relations, which are used to expand the search space and mitigate retrieval failures such as misdirection and depth limitations. The frame-work iteratively selects and scores candidate super-relations using LLM prompting, enabling simul-taneous forward and backward reasoning without exponentially increasing computational cost. By summarizing multiple relational paths into super-relations, ReKnoS effectively addresses the chal-lenge of low retrieval rates in complex knowledge graph question answering tasks. 

SRP (Zhu et al., 2025) integrates iterative plan-ning and reflection by first searching for relevant references to guide the process, then generating and checking initial reasoning paths. It performs knowledge retrieval from KGs and employs a self-reflection mechanism to judge and edit the rea-soning paths iteratively until a reliable answer is retrieved. The approach addresses the problem of LLM hallucinations and incomplete reasoning in KGQA by combining structured knowledge re-trieval with systematic, feedback-driven path re-finement. 

PoG (Chen et al., 2024a) is a novel self-correcting adaptive planning paradigm for LLMs augmented with KGs. PoG addresses the limita-tions of existing KG-augmented LLM methods, such as fixed exploration breadth, irreversible rea-soning paths, and susceptibility to forgetting query conditions. The framework iteratively performs task decomposition into sub-objectives, conducts adaptive path exploration on the KG, maintains a dynamic memory of retrieved subgraphs and rea-soning states, and employs a reflection mechanism to evaluate and self-correct erroneous paths. By integrating guidance through sub-objectives, con-tinuous memory updates, and reflective backtrack-ing, PoG enables more flexible, reliable, and ef-ficient graph reasoning, effectively enhancing the planning and correction capabilities of LLMs in complex KG question-answering scenarios. 

D Definition of Token Utility Rate 

Token Utility Rate (TUR) measures the amount of question-relevant factual information processed per token consumed by the LLM when answer-ing a specific question. It is designed to evaluate the information-processing efficiency of different methods in knowledge-intensive reasoning tasks. Given a question q, TUR is defined as: 

TUR( q) = Nrel (q)len(input q) + len(output q) , (5) where Nrel (q) denotes the number of question-relevant factual units accessible to the model during inference, len(input q) denotes the number of to-kens in the input prompt, and len(output q) denotes the number of tokens in the generated output. Dataset Method # LLM Calls Total Tokens Fact Units Time (s) TUR Gain CWQ PoG 25.1 17,174.3 408 103.8 0.0238 1.0×                                

> Ours 7.0 20,928.2 20,276 100.1 0.9688 40.7 ×
> WebQSP PoG 13.0 8,401.2 177 52.9 0.0211 1.0×
> Ours 3.8 11,270.1 11,213 65.1 0.9949 47.2 ×
> GrailQA PoG 7.5 4,553.5 70 37.0 0.0154 1.0×
> Ours 4.2 11,112.5 8,148 49.0 0.7332 47.6 ×

Table 4: Efficiency and Token Utilization Analysis 

For a dataset Q, we report the average TUR over all questions: 

TUR( Q) = 1

|Q| 

X

> q∈Q

TUR( q). (6) 

Factual Unit. A factual unit is defined as the minimal independent knowledge fragment within a knowledge graph that can be accessed by the model during inference. In this work, factual units are instantiated in one of the following forms: • Triple format: (h, r, t ), where h

is the head entity, r is the relation, and t is the tail entity. For example, 

(Albert_Einstein , place_of_birth , Ulm )

indicates that Albert Einstein was born in Ulm. • One-hop relation format: (h, r ),where h is the head entity and r is an accessible relation. For example, 

(Albert_Einstein , place_of_birth ) indi-cates that the entity Albert Einstein has a birth-place attribute. 

Counting Rules. We count factual units accord-ing to the following rules: • Each complete triple (h, r, t ) counts as one factual unit. • Each independent one-hop relation (h, r )

counts as one factual unit. • Composite relations are decomposed into mul-tiple independent factual units and counted accordingly. 

TUR Calculation. For our CoG-based method, 

Nrel (q) is computed based on the number of acces-sible factual units instantiated from Python classes and passed to the LLM during inference. For PoG, 

Nrel (q) is calculated by counting all one-hop re-lations involved in relation pruning and all triples accessed during reasoning. The denominator in Eq. 5 is computed as the total number of input and output tokens consumed by the LLM for answering question q.

E Error Analysis 

To systematically analyze our method, we ran-domly selected erroneous samples from the We-bQSP, CWQ, and GrailQA datasets and conducted a manual error analysis. We mainly categorize the errors into four types: Subtask Planning Error, Re-trieval Error, Reasoning Error, and Max Attempts Error. Figure 6 presents the analysis results. CWQ        

> Subtask Planning Retrieval Reasoning Max Attempts
> WebQSP
> 10%
> 30%
> 23.3%
> 36.7% 26.7% 23.3%
> 20% 43.3%
> GrailQA
> 26.6%
> 23.3%
> 30%
> 20%

Figure 6: Error distribution across the three datasets. 

Subtask Planning. This type of error occurs during the subtask decomposition stage. When decomposing complex questions, CoG may devi-ate from the intent of the original question, or the subtask evaluation module may fail to terminate the reasoning process in time, thereby introduc-ing unnecessary steps that complicate an otherwise straightforward question and ultimately lead to an incorrect answer. For the question “What sports facility is home to both the Houston Astros and Houston Hotshots?”, CoG correctly decomposes the first three subtasks: (1) “Find the home sports facility or venue of the Houston Astros”, (2) “Find the home sports facility or venue of the Houston Hotshots.”, and (3) “Identify the shared sports facil-ity among the home venues of the Houston Astros and Houston Hotshots.” At this point, CoG has already identified the correct answer, “Lakewood Church Central Campus”. However, due to the failure of the evaluation module, it continues to ex-ecute additional steps, such as (4) “Verify whether Lakewood Church Central Campus is a sports fa-cility and confirm that it is the answer to the ques-tion asking for the shared home venue of the two teams.” and (5) “Find the home sports facility or venue of the Houston Astros for comparison with the venue of the Houston Hotshots.” These extra steps gradually steer the model away from the cor-rect direction, and after as many as eight reasoning steps, it eventually produces an incorrect answer. 

Retrieval Error. This type of error occurs dur-ing the subgraph retrieval stage. The retriever fails to recall the correct schema, which leads to failure in the final reasoning process. Such errors usually involve subtasks with implicit semantic meanings. For example, for the subtask “Identify the regions the Mississippi River flows through.”, the relation used in the gold query is “contained by”; that is, if a location contains the Mississippi River, then the river flows through that location. However, CoG fails to recall the relation “contained by” for this subtask. 

Reasoning Error. This type of error occurs during the code generation and execution stage. Although CoG recalls the correct schema, semantic misunderstanding or the selection of a similar but incorrect relation eventually leads to an incorrect answer. For example, for the question “Where does Marta play soccer?”, the gold reasoning chain is pro_athlete.teams → sports_team_roster.team 

→ [Brazil women’s national football team, Tyresö FF]. However, CoG incorrectly reasons through player_statistics → player_stats_team → [Umeå IK], and finally generates an incorrect answer. 

Max Attempts Error. This type of error occurs during the code generation and execution stage. Al-though CoG recalls the correct schema, the subtask may be challenging, causing the model to become trapped in a local optimum or stuck at a CVT (Com-pound Value Type) node. This results in repeated correction attempts until the maximum retry limit is reached. Background on CVT: CVT relations represent complex relations and usually require two consecutive hops to move from a semantically meaningful head entity to a semantically meaning-ful tail entity. The intermediate entity itself has no practical meaning and no readable name. For example, for the question “Who dated the nominee for the Venice Film Festival Upstream Prize for Best Actress?”, the first subtask, “Find the nomi-nee for the Venice Film Festival Upstream Prize for Best Actress”, is successfully solved, yield-ing “Scarlett Johansson”. However, in the second subtask, “Find the people who dated Scarlett Jo-hansson, the nominee for the Venice Film Festival Upstream Prize for Best Actress”, the code gen-erated by CoG consistently retrieves meaningless intermediate nodes through the first-hop CVT rela-tion “celebrity.dated”, without completing the sec-ond hop, “dated.participant”, to obtain the correct answer entities. 

F Analysis of Code Correction 

Analysis of Different Code Correction Attempts. 

During the generation of reasoning code by the LLM, various errors may occur—such as incor-rect variable selection, wrong relation extraction, or mistakenly choosing CVT nodes as answers. These issues are corrected through feedback-driven retries. Therefore, we allow CoG a limited number of attempts. We investigate the relationship be-tween the maximum number of attempts per ques-tion and Hits@1. 60      

> 65
> 70
> 75
> 80
> 85
> 012345
> Hits@1
> Max Correction Attempt
> Figure 7: Effect of the Maximum Number of Correction Attempts on CWQ

As shown in Figure 7, for the more complex CWQ dataset (where each question requires multi-step reasoning), we vary the maximum attempts from 0 to 5. When set to 0, no error feedback or retry is allowed. The results show that increasing the maximum number of attempts consistently im-proves CoG’s performance. However, considering the additional time and token cost incurred by re-tries, we recommend setting the maximum attempt limit to 3. 

The analysis of code correction invocation. Fig-ure 8 shows the proportion of code correction in-vocations by CoG using different models across 15.58%         

> 84.42%
> 62.50%
> 37.50%
> 86.52%
> 13.48% 13.04%
> 86.96%
> 66.73%
> 33.27%
> 86.56%
> 13.44%
> WebQSP CWQ GrailQA
> Qwen3 -Coder DeepSeek -V3 Qwen3 -Coder DeepSeek -V3 Qwen3 -Coder DeepSeek -V3
> Corrected Uncorrected

Figure 8: The proportion of cases that involve code correction with Qwen3-Coder-30B-A3B and DeepSeek-V3.2 on three datasets. 

three datasets. Corrected indicates an invocation, while Uncorrected indicates the opposite. Overall, a significant number of samples invoked the error correction mechanism. CoG’s proportion of error correction invocations on WebQSP and GrailQA is lower than that on CWQ, approximately only half of the latter. This is because CWQ has more complex question patterns and greater reasoning difficulty, making it more prone to errors. Exam-ining the performance of different models within each dataset individually reveals that DeepSeek-V3.2, which possesses stronger reasoning and cod-ing capabilities, has a lower proportion of error correction invocations compared to the relatively weaker Qwen3-Coder. This indicates that more powerful models exhibit better stability. Figure 9 shows the performance of the sam-ples after the code correction mechanism is ap-plied, specifically whether the final answer is cor-rect. It can be observed that CoG, using both Qwen3-Coder-30B-A3B and DeepSeek-V3.2, suc-cessfully corrected many samples, especially the latter, which corrected more than half of the sam-ples. This demonstrates the strong robustness of CoG. 

G Case Study 

As illustrated in Figure 3, when performing code reasoning, CoG demonstrates rich logical com-positions. To demonstrate the advantages of our method, we further compare it with predefined-tool-based methods, as shown in Figure 10. Also, in Figure 11, we select three representative scenarios in which CoG generates logical operations, namely 

Method WebQSP CWQ GrailQA Hits@1 F1 Hits@1 F1 Hits@1 F1 EffiQA 82.9 – 69.5 – 78.4 –RoG 85.7 70.8 62.6 56.2 – –Ours 88.7 67.8 79.1 68.3 91.0 77.0 

Table 5: Performance comparison with other methods on WebQSP, CWQ, and GrailQA. We use Hits@1 and F1 score for evaluation. EffiQA (Dong et al., 2024) uses GPT-4, and RoG (Luo et al., 2024b) is a fine-tuning method. Our method uses DeepSeek-V3.2. 

Argmax, Argmin, and Union. For the question “Which school with the latest founding date did James Baldwin attend?”, CoG compares the founding dates of the schools and se-lects the one with the latest date. For the question “Holding his governmental position from earliest, who founded New York University?”, CoG iden-tifies the founder with the earliest starting date by comparing the dates of holding governmental posi-tions. For the question “What major trading partner of China is the home of Monteith’s Lager beer?”, it is necessary to identify countries that either export to China or import from China. CoG accomplishes this operation using OR logic. WebQSP CWQ GrailQA 

Qwen3 -Coder 

-30B -A3B 

DeepSeek 

-V3.2 

32.81% 

67.19% 

35.71% 

64.29% 

36.27% 

63.73% 

57.55% 

42.45% 

24.81% 

75.19% 

37.12% 62.88% 

Hit 

Miss Figure 9: The hit rate of the corrected cases for Qwen3-Coder-30B-A3B and DeepSeek-V3.2 Which city held the Summer Olympics twice? 

Summer 

Olympics 

KG 

KG -

Agent 

CoG 

Subtask 1: Find the city held the Summer Olympics. 

Q

Sub -

tasks Subtask 2: Group by host city and find the cities with a count 

of 2. 

Answer : [Since the available tools do not support group -by aggregation, 

the model incorrectly returns all distinct host cities instead of the cities 

that hosted the Summer Olympics exactly twice.] Based on execution, the 

answer is Athens, Paris, London... .

Answer : [CoG first identifies the host city of each Olympic Games, then 

counts how many times each city hosted the Games. Finally, it iterates 

through all the cities and selects those with a count of 2. The execution 

result is Los Angeles and Tokyo . (knowledge cutoff: 2016). 

Reasoning 

Game* event Event* Host city Location* 

(Summer Olympics) (LA...) 

event 

1920 Summer Olympics 

1932 Summer Olympics 

1984 Summer Olympics 

... 

host city 

host city Los Angeles 

Los Angeles 

... 

(1984 Summer 

Olympics...) 

for event in entities: 

if(event == Summer Olympic Games): 

for games in event.instances: 

city = games.host_city 

city.count += 1 

for city in cities: 

if(city.count == 2): answer.add(city) 

e1 = get_candidate_entity("Summer Olympic Games") 

e2 = get_tail_entity(e1, time.recurring_event.instances) 

# e2 = {1896 Summer Olympics, 1900 Summer Olympics, ..., 1964 Summer Olympics} 

... 

n = count(e3) 

answer = end(e3) 

# Wrong answer = {Athens, Paris, St. Louis, London, Stockholm, Antwerp... 

Figure 10: A comparison between CoG and predefined-tool-based methods in answering complex questions. The question is drawn from WebQSP. Argmin 

Question: Which school with the latest founding date did James Baldwin attend? 

Argmax 

Find the schools attended by James Baldwin. Find the founding dates of each school from step 1. Identify which school has the latest 

founding date from step 2 

class EducationalInstitution: 

# entities like The New School(m.06thjt) , etc. 

def __init__( self , _mid : str = None ,

education_educational_institution_mascot : List ['SchoolMascot'] = None ,

... 

organization_organization_date_founded : List ['Datetime'] = None ): 

self ._mid = _mid 

... 

# describes a school's mascot 

self .education_educational_institution_mascot = 

education_educational_institution_mascot or [] 

# describes the date this organization first came into being 

self .organization_organization_date_founded = 

organization_organization_date_founded or [] 

class Datetime: 

... 

Class Definitions 

... 

latest_date = None 

latest_schools = [ ]

for mid, date_str in founding_dates.items(): 

if not date_str: 

continue 

# discover a later date and reset the list 

if latest_date is None or date_str > latest_date: 

latest_date = date_str latest_schools = [mid] 

# same latest date, add to the list. 

elif date_str == latest_date: 

latest_schools.append(mid) 

... 

Question: Holding his governmental position from earliest , who founded New York University? 

Find the founders of New York University. Find the governmental positions and their start 

dates from step 1. 

Compare the earliest governmental 

position start dates from step 2 

Class Definitions 

... 

if "governmental_positions" in founder_data: 

earliest_date = None 

position_details = [] 

for position in 

founder_data["governmental_positions"]: 

if "start_dates" in position: 

for start_date in position["start_dates"]: 

# Compare dates as strings (YYYY -MM -DD format 

allows string comparison) 

if start_date: 

if earliest_date is None or start_date < 

earliest_date: 

earliest_date = start_date 

... 

class GovernmentPositionHeldCVT: 

# CVT nodes, which refer to an intermediate step 

def __init__( self , _mid : str = None ,

... 

government_government_position_held_from : List['Datetime'] = None ,

government_government_position_held_to : List['Datetime'] = None ): 

# describes the date when the officeholder started working in this 

government position 

self ._mid = _mid 

# describes the date when the officeholder ceased working in this 

government position 

self .government_government_position_held_from = 

government_government_position_held_from or [] 

# describes the date when the officeholder ceased working in this 

government position 

self .government_government_position_held_to = 

government_government_position_held_to or [] 

class Datetime: 

... 

Union 

Question: What major trading partner of China is the home of Monteith's Lager beer? 

Find the country or location of 

origin for Monteith's Lager beer. Find the major trading partners of China. Find the country that is both the origin of Monteith's Lager 

and a major trading partner of China. 

class ImportsAndExportsCVT: 

# CVT nodes, which refer to an intermediate step 

def __init__( self , _mid : str = None ,

... 

location_imports_and_exports_exported_to :

List ['StatisticalRegion'] = None ,

location_imports_and_exports_imported_from :

List['StatisticalRegion'] = None ): 

self ._mid = _mid 

# describes the exported to of imports and exports 

self .location_imports_and_exports_exported_to = 

location_imports_and_exports_exported_to or [] 

# describes the imported from of imports and exports 

self .location_imports_and_exports_imported_from = 

location_imports_and_exports_imported_from or [] 

class StatisticalRegion: 

... 

... 

for region in entity.location_imports_and_exports_exported_to: 

... 

# Then the imported_from regions are China's trading partners (exporters 

to China) 

if hasattr(entity, 'location_imports_and_exports_imported_from’): 

for partner in entity.location_imports_and_exports_imported_from: 

if hasattr(partner, '_mid') and partner._mid != china_mid: 

trading_partners.add(partner._mid) 

# Check if China is imported_from (i.e., China exports to some country) 

... 

# Then the exported_to regions are China's trading partners 

(importers from China) 

if hasattr(entity, 'location_imports_and_exports_exported_to’): 

for partner in entity.location_imports_and_exports_exported_to: 

if hasattr(partner, '_mid') and partner._mid != china_mid: 

trading_partners.add(partner._mid) 

... 

Reasoning Code 

Reasoning Code 

Reasoning Code Class Definitions 

Answer: The New School 

Answer: Albert Gallatin 

Answer: New Zealand Figure 11: Three representative operators in the CWQ dataset (i.e., Argmax, Argmin, and Union). For each question, we present the scenario corresponding to one of the subtasks. The class definitions of the subtask are shown on the left, while the corresponding operation code is displayed on the right. The parts marked in blue represent the core information relevant to the operation.