CRISP: A Framework for Clause-Reconstructed
Interpretable NeuroSymbolic Propositions
Alex Chan∗, Shafi Muhtasim Chowdhury†, Ekin Can Erkus∗, Ole-Christoffer Granmo‡,
Alex Yakovlev∗, and Rishad Shafik∗
∗School of Engineering, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK
†Northumbria University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK
‡Centre for Artificial Intelligence Research, University of Agder, Grimstad, Norway
{alex.chan, ekin.erkus, alex.yakovlev, rishad.shafik}@newcastle.ac.uk, shafi.chowdhury@northumbria.ac.uk, ole.granmo@uia.no
Abstract—Deep neural networks achieve high accuracy through
layered numerical transformations, yet their decisions remain
difficult to audit because decision evidence is encoded in hidden
activations rather than explicit rules. This paper introduces
CRISP, a framework that reconstructs the last-layer activation
vector (LLAV) of binary neural teachers as Tsetlin Machine
(TM) clauses. CRISP sign-binarizes the teacher’s penultimate
pre-logit activations, and assigns one Individual TM (ITM) to
each LLAV neuron. Each reconstructed hidden bit is represented
by propositional clauses over Booleanized input features, which
gives a direct symbolic trace from named input thresholds
to a named teacher neuron. CRISP is evaluated on MNIST,
KMNIST, FashionMNIST (FMNIST), SVHN, and CIFAR10 using
a BinaryConnect convolutional neural network (BCCNN) teacher
and a fully binary neural network (BNN) teacher, with an
additional study on binary thresholding, thermometer encoding,
and quartile binning at multiple bit depths. The results show that
LLAV sign-binarization does not reduce teacher-head accuracy
in the tested BNN setting, while ITM reconstruction error is the
main limiting factor. Quartile one-bit Booleanization gives the
strongest reconstruction fidelity on SVHN at 87.52% test fidelity
and is competitive on CIFAR10, and the reconstructed LLAV
preserves 78.41% teacher-head accuracy on FMNIST. Pooled
clause-evidence visualizations show that the learned ITM literals
concentrate on the object region in centered benchmarks. CRISP
therefore provides a clause-level route for inspecting the final
hidden representation of binary neural teachers.
Index Terms—Tsetlin Machine, Binary Neural Networks, Inter-
pretability, Neural-Symbolic Integration, Symbolic Reconstruction,
Booleanization
I. INTRODUCTION
Deep neural networks [1] are widely used for image
classification, medical decision support, financial risk modeling,
and other high-dimensional tasks [2], [3]. Their accuracy comes
from hierarchical representation learning, where early layers
extract local evidence, deeper layers compose this evidence into
task-relevant abstractions, and final hidden states concentrate
decision information into compact internal codes. However,
this representational depth also creates an auditing problem, as
the final prediction is not completely visible. This is because
the path to that prediction is not human-understandable, as it
is distributed across many hidden units and parameters that are
expressed through arithmetic transformations. As a result, the
Arxiv preprint version. This is an accepted paper for the International
Symposium on the Tsetlin Machine (ISTM) 2026.
learned model is difficult to inspect, verify, or translate into
symbolic form [4], [5], [6].
Structurally, a neural network is a composition of matrix
multiplications, additions, normalizations, and nonlinearities [1].
The final prediction emerges from the cumulative effect of
these operations, while many intermediate states are difficult
to assign direct semantic meaning [4], [7], [8]. The pre-
logit activations in the final hidden layer are a natural target
for symbolic reconstruction because they summarize the
computation immediately before classification [9], [10]. Prior
work shows that deeper layers capture more class-discriminative
features [11], final-layer visualizations reveal structured seman-
tic transformations [12], and final hidden representations often
contain linearly separable class information [10]. Decoding
this layer in terms of the original input therefore offers a
focused way to study what the network has learned without
reconstructing every intermediate operation.
This paper proposes CRISP, a framework that pairs a binary
neural teacher with a bank of Tsetlin Machines (TMs) [13].
Each Individual Tsetlin Machine (ITM) reconstructs one
coordinate of the teacher’s binary last-layer activation vector
(LLAV) from a Boolean encoding of the original input. Each
reconstructed LLAV bit is expressed by propositional clauses
over binarized input features. The resulting surrogate preserves
neuron identity because every hidden coordinate remains tied
to its assigned ITM, and it provides an inspection path because
each ITM exposes the literals that support or oppose the
reconstructed firing state.
CRISP tests the hypothesis that the internal firing pattern
of a black-box binary neural network can be approximated
by symbolic clauses over the original input. This hypothesis
leads to three research questions. RQ1) Can symbolic LLAV
surrogates reconstruct a teacher network’s pre-logit activations
despite the cumulative effect of successive filtering and
transformations? RQ2) How does the input Booleanization
strategy affect reconstruction quality? RQ3) How does teacher
architecture affect symbolic reconstruction fidelity?
To answer these questions, CRISP is evaluated with two
binary teacher architectures, a fully binarized neural network
(BNN) [14], [15], [16] and a BinaryConnect Convolutional
Neural Network (BCCNN) [17]. The main experimental flow
spans five image classification datasets, namely, MNIST [18],
arXiv:2610.02431v1  [cs.LG]  1 Oct 2026


KMNIST [19], FashionMNIST (FMNIST) [20], SVHN [21],
and CIFAR10 [22], to provide broader validity of the results.
A Booleanization study then compares binary thresholding,
thermometer encoding, and quartile binning at multiple bit
depths on SVHN and CIFAR10.
Thus, this paper makes three contributions. First, it defines a
neuron-wise symbolic surrogate layer that aligns one ITM with
one teacher hidden neuron and reconstructs the LLAV from
Booleanized input. Second, it quantifies how input Booleaniza-
tion and teacher architecture affect symbolic reconstruction
fidelity. Third, it shows how reconstructed LLAV bits can
be inspected as clauses over named pixel-threshold features,
including pooled clause-evidence visualizations that link hidden-
bit reconstruction to input regions. CRISP is intended as a
representation-level audit tool rather than a classifier: it exposes
the teacher’s final hidden interface as inspectable clauses rather
than replacing the teacher head, and targets the LLAV since
that is the representation the binary classifier head consumes.
Such an LLAV reconstruction offers two benefits that are
not usually available together in per-prediction explanation
tools. First, the ITMs are fixed after training, so the same
clauses can be inspected across samples, classes, and model
variants. The surrogate is therefore a persistent audit object
rather than a single local explanation. Second, because the
reconstruction targets the exact binary interface the classifier
head consumes, the reconstructed binary activations can be
fed directly through the teacher’s own head to test whether it
retains class-relevant information, without rerunning the full
teacher. CRISP therefore evaluates both interpretability and
representational sufficiency since clauses expose how hidden
bits are reconstructed, while the injection test measures whether
the reconstructed hidden states remain usable for classification.
Section II defines CRISP and positions it relative to prior
work. Section III describes the experimental protocol. Sec-
tion IV presents baseline reconstruction results, the LLAV
injection test, the Booleanization study, and clause-level
interpretation examples. Section V concludes the paper.
II. CRISP: PROPOSED FRAMEWORK
Figure 1 depicts the CRISP workflow, which operates in
two stages. The first stage trains a binary neural teacher on the
classification task and extracts the binarized LLAV for each
sample. The second stage trains one ITM per LLAV neuron,
where each ITM learns to reconstruct its assigned neuron’s
firing state from a Boolean encoding of the original input. The
output is a symbolic surrogate of the teacher’s final hidden
representation in which each reconstructed bit corresponds to
inspectable clauses over input features.
The teacher first maps the input to a pre-logit representation.
This representation is converted into the LLAV and paired with
a Booleanized version of the original input to build the training
set for the ITM bank. Representational sufficiency is assessed
by an injection test in Section IV-B, where the reconstructed
LLAV is passed through the teacher’s own classification head
fcout to measure whether the reconstructed neurons are usable
for classification without introducing a separately trained
classifier. The framework is therefore centered on symbolic
hidden-state reconstruction. Input Booleanization defines the
clause vocabulary, LLAV extraction defines the reconstruction
targets, and the ITM bank defines the symbolic surrogate.
Algorithm 1 summarizes the training and inference procedure.
The teacher is trained first and then frozen. LLAV targets are
extracted once for the training, validation, and test splits. Each
ITM is trained independently against one LLAV coordinate, so
the 256-neuron setting produces 256 binary symbolic recon-
struction tasks. At inference time, a new input is Booleanized,
passed through the ITM bank, and mapped to a reconstructed
LLAV that can be inspected directly.
Algorithm 1 CRISP Symbolic LLAV Reconstruction
Require: Training data Dtr, validation data Dval, test data Dte, teacher fT ,
Booleanizer ϕ, hidden size H
Ensure: ITM bank {Mj}H
j=1 and reconstructed LLAV ˆh(x)
1: Train binary teacher fT on Dtr and select hyperparameters using Dval.
2: Freeze fT and extract hT (x) from Equation (1) for all splits.
3: Fit any data-dependent Booleanization parameters on Dtr only.
4: Transform each input to ϕ(x) for training, validation, and test samples.
5: for j = 1 to H do
6:
Train ITM Mj to predict hT,j(x) from ϕ(x).
7: end for
8: Form ˆh(x) using Equation (9).
9: Evaluate reconstruction fidelity with Equation (2).
A. Relation to Prior Work
Interpretability methods for neural networks can be grouped
by what they explain. Attribution and saliency methods assign
importance to input features for a given prediction [23],
[24]. Local surrogate methods approximate a model around
a sample or a local neighborhood [25]. Concept-based ap-
proaches connect predictions to user-defined concepts [26].
Visualization methods inspect filters, activations, or internal
representations [12]. These approaches can identify relevant
associations, but they do not convert a named hidden coordinate
into a persistent symbolic object, which can be reused across
samples and directly tested as an input to the classifier head.
TMs provide a different form of interpretability because their
clauses are explicit conjunctions over Boolean literals [13].
This property makes TMs well suited for rule-like symbolic
representations, but standard TM classifiers operate directly on
labels rather than on internal neural states. Related symbolic-
transfer work has approximated final hidden activations with
symbolic regression [27], and TM-based distillation has used
teacher output distributions to guide TM students [28]. CRISP
differs in target and granularity. It reconstructs the BNN’s
pre-logit LLAV neuron by neuron, and each reconstructed
bit is represented as a set of TM clauses over named input
literals. In particular, unlike temperature-scaled logit distillation,
CRISP reconstructs the hard, sign-binarized LLAV instead of a
softened output distribution, so there is no softmax temperature
to tune. The explanation is therefore tied to the teacher’s
internal representation rather than only to the output label. This
representation-level use of TM clauses also connects CRISP to
the wider neural-symbolic integration literature, which argues


Fig. 1: CRISP workflow. A binary neural teacher is trained on the image task, the teacher’s LLAV is extracted and sign-binarized,
the original input is Booleanized, and one ITM is trained per LLAV coordinate to form a clause-based hidden-state surrogate.
for learning systems whose internal reasoning remains legible
as models scale [29].
B. Problem Setting and Teacher Extraction
Let x ∈X denote an input image and y ∈{1, . . . , C} denote
its ground-truth class. A teacher fT produces a predicted label
˜y(x) = arg maxk pT,k(x) and a binary hidden state hT (x) ∈
{0, 1}H at the penultimate layer. The binary LLAV can be
obtained as
hT (x) = 1[gT (x) > 0],
(1)
where gT (x) ∈RH is the pre-threshold activation vector of
the teacher’s penultimate layer, and the indicator is applied
coordinate-wise. As shown in Figure 1b–c, hT (x) is extracted
after the teacher has combined convolutional filtering, pooling,
and fully connected binary transformations, so each LLAV
coordinate can aggregate spatially extended evidence from the
input [12]. In the reported experiments, H = 256.
CRISP constructs a symbolic surrogate ˆh(x) that reproduces
hT (x) while exposing a clause-level trace from each recon-
structed bit to the input. Reconstruction quality for neuron j
is measured by
qj = 1
N
N
X
i=1
1
h
ˆhj(xi) = hT,j(xi)
i
,
(2)
where N is the number of evaluation samples, hT,j(xi) is
the teacher’s binary activation for neuron j, and ˆhj(xi) is
the corresponding ITM reconstruction. The aggregate recon-
struction fidelity is the mean of qj over all H neurons, and
the reconstruction fidelity measures how well the symbolic
bank reproduces the neural teacher’s binary activations, with
an injection test in Section IV-B that separately determines if
the reconstructed activations are usable for classification.
The LLAV binarization in Equation (1) can discard activation
magnitude. In the BNN injection experiment reported in
Section IV-B, this loss does not reduce teacher-head accuracy
because the final binary output layer applies a sign operation
before classification. Thus, the tested BNN head already uses
the LLAV sign pattern as its operative interface. CRISP takes
this binary interface as the reconstruction target and asks
whether it can be recovered by clauses over the original input.
C. Input Booleanization
ITM training requires each input to be expressed as a Boolean
vector because TM clauses are defined over literals and their
negations [13]. Let ϕ(x) ∈{0, 1}d denote the Booleanized
input, where d is the encoded input dimension. The encoding
scheme determines both the information retained from the
raw input and the clauses that the ITM can form. CRISP
evaluates three schemes at bit depths nbits ∈{1, 2, 4} in
the Booleanization study: Binary thresholding, thermometer
encoding, and quartile binning.
For a normalized scalar feature u ∈[0, 1], binary threshold-
ing produces one bit, which serves as a one-threshold baseline:
b(u) = 1[u > 0.5].
(3)
Thermometer encoding first maps u to an integer level,
ℓ(u) = min(⌊u nbits⌋, nbits −1) ,
(4)
where ℓ(u) is the quantized level. The encoded bits are then
tm(u) =
(
1[u > 0.5],
nbits = 1,
1[ℓ(u) > m],
nbits ≥2,
(5)
for m = 0, . . . , nbits −1, where tm(u) is the m-th thermometer
bit. This representation preserves ordinal threshold information,
so a clause can express that a feature exceeds a level using
a single literal [30]. Note that the top thermometer bit m =
nbits −1 evaluates 1[ℓ(u) > nbits −1], which is never satisfied
due to ℓ(u) ≤nbits −1. Therefore, it is constant (always 0)
and non-informative, so an nbits-bit thermometer code carries
nbits −1 informative bits.
Quartile binning replaces the uniform levels in Equation (4)
with data-dependent quantile thresholds estimated from the
training set only. Let q1, . . . , qnbits−1 denote the
1
nbits , . . . , nbits−1
nbits
empirical quantiles of a feature. The bin index is
k(u) =
nbits−1
X
r=1
1[u > qr],
(6)


The final quartile bits are
qm(u) =
(
1[u > q1],
nbits = 1,
1[k(u) > m],
nbits ≥2,
(7)
for m = 0, . . . , nbits −1, where qm(u) is the m-th quartile bit
and, for nbits = 1, no interior quantiles are defined, so q1 is
taken as the training-set median of the feature to be consistent
with the one-bit setting used in Section IV-C. Quartile binning
adapts thresholds to the empirical feature distribution instead of
assuming that intensities are uniformly spread over [0, 1] [31].
All data-dependent thresholds are fitted on training data only
and then applied unchanged to validation and test data.
D. ITM Bank Training and Inference
CRISP trains one ITM Mj for each hidden neuron j ∈
{1, . . . , H}, as illustrated in Figure 1c–d. Each ITM predicts
whether its assigned teacher neuron fires:
ˆhj(x) = Mj(ϕ(x)) ,
(8)
where ϕ(x) is the Booleanized input. The surrogate bank then
produces
ˆh(x) =
h
ˆh1(x), . . . , ˆhH(x)
i
.
(9)
Each clause in Mj is a conjunction over literals from ϕ(x)
and their negations. A reconstructed bit ˆhj(x) = 1 therefore
corresponds to a set of active clauses, and each active clause
identifies a specific input-threshold pattern associated with the
teacher neuron’s activation.
E. Interpretability Scope and Computational Cost
The symbolic part of CRISP is the ITM bank, where the
teacher remains as a learned neural model. CRISP should
therefore be interpreted as a representation-level reconstruction
method rather than a claim of full teacher transparency.
The reconstruction metric in Equation (2) measures whether
the ITM bank reconstructs the teacher LLAV. The clause
representation also allows each reconstructed bit to be inspected,
which is possible because Booleanization assigns a known
meaning to every input bit, as each literal relates to a feature-
threshold statement instead of an anonymous array index. Thus,
CRISP is neuro-symbolic in the sense that the reconstruction
target originates from a neural teacher, and the reconstructed
form is a set of symbolic clauses over named features [32].
For a given sample, clause evidence is pooled across all H
ITMs and mapped back to the input coordinates constrained by
the surviving literals. Each literal is classified along two axes,
namely, clause polarity, which indicates whether the clause
supports or opposes its ITM output, and literal polarity, which
indicates whether the literal demands a thresholded feature
Xi or its negation Xi. Under thermometer encoding, the top
threshold bit is always false by construction in Equation (5).
Its negation is therefore excluded from the pooled maps so
that a fixed, non-informative term does not dilute the evidence.
Section IV-D applies this procedure to representative samples.
Let H denote the number of LLAV coordinates, EITM the
number of ITM training epochs, m the number of clauses per
ITM, and d the Booleanized input dimension. A conservative
worst-case training-pass cost scales as
O(HEITMmd) ,
(10)
where the dominant term comes from evaluating clause
literals across the ITM bank. This cost is parallel over LLAV
coordinates, as each ITM is trained independently. The method
introduces an offline reconstruction cost, but keeps inference
and inspection modular, so that each reconstructed bit can be
evaluated, inspected, or replaced without retraining the bank.
III. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
A. Data
Five ten-class image classification benchmarks are used
as described in Table I, which summarizes the image size,
channel count, and the training, validation, and test split of each
dataset. The benchmark set spans grayscale digit recognition,
visually similar handwritten character recognition, clothing
classification, street-view digit recognition, and color object
classification. This range tests whether LLAV reconstruction
remains stable as the teacher representation becomes more
spatially and semantically demanding. Binary network architec-
tures are used as teachers because their classifier heads expose
sign-based hidden interfaces, so the LLAV captures the state
that the binary classifier consumes.
TABLE I: Summary of the five benchmark datasets used.
Dataset
Size
Channels
Train
Val
Test
MNIST
28 × 28
1
55,000
5,000
10,000
KMNIST
28 × 28
1
55,000
5,000
10,000
FMNIST
28 × 28
1
55,000
5,000
10,000
SVHN
32 × 32
3
68,257
5,000
26,032
CIFAR10
32 × 32
3
45,000
5,000
10,000
B. Teacher Architectures
Two binary teacher variants are evaluated because they
expose two levels of binarization. Both use six binary convolu-
tional blocks with channel widths 1 →128 →128 →256 →
256 →512 →512 for grayscale inputs and 3 →128 →· · · →
512 for color inputs, three max-pooling stages, four binary
fully connected blocks dflat →1024 →1024 →512 →256,
and a binary output layer 256 →10. The penultimate fully
connected layer produces the 256-dimensional pre-activation
vector that is sign-binarized to form the LLAV.
The teachers differ in binarization strategy. The BCCNN
binarizes weights through a straight-through estimator, while
retaining ReLU activations between hidden layers. The BNN
binarizes both weights and activations by replacing ReLU
with a sign function at each hidden layer. Thus, the BCCNN
preserves continuous activation magnitudes during intermediate
forward computation, while the BNN operates on binary hidden
signals after the first layer. Both teachers use BatchNorm after
each binary layer. These variants separate the effect of weight-
only binarization from the effect of fully binarized hidden
computation.


C. Training Protocol
CRISP’s protocol, as shown in Figure 1, has two parts. The
first establishes baseline CRISP reconstruction across all five
datasets using the baseline 8-bit thermometer input encoding.
The second isolates the effect of input Booleanization on re-
construction fidelity using SVHN and CIFAR10 configurations
with binary thresholding, thermometer encoding, and quartile
binning. For every dataset, the LLAV is extracted from the
teacher’s pre-logit layer and the raw input is Booleanized
(Figure 1c), forming the ITM targets and inputs, respectively.
The ITMs (Figure 1d) are trained on this Booleanized input for
5 epochs using fixed hyperparameters (50 clauses, threshold
T = 20, specificity s = 4.0) instead of a per-dataset search,
while data-dependent Booleanization thresholds are fitted on
the training split only. ITMs run in parallel through a process
pool, with progress checkpointed after each round.
D. Evaluation Metrics
The primary CRISP metric is reconstruction fidelity, defined
in Equation (2) as the mean per-neuron bit-level accuracy of
the ITM bank in reproducing the teacher LLAV, which is
evaluated on the held-out test data. The ITM mean accuracy is
the average per-neuron training accuracy across the ITM bank,
computed using Equation (11):
AccITM = 1
H
H
X
j=1
aj,
(11)
where aj is the bit-level training accuracy of ITM Mj and H
is the number of ITMs in the bank. Note that this in-sample
quantity is used only for selection, and is not reported as a result.
Teacher accuracy is reported to contextualize how informative
the original teacher representation is, but the main CRISP
objective is reconstruction of the teacher’s internal state rather
than direct replacement of the teacher classifier. The LLAV
injection test additionally reports Cohen’s κ and the Matthews
correlation coefficient (MCC) to assess agreement beyond
raw accuracy in the reconstructed-head setting [33], [34]. The
Booleanization study reports the encoded input dimension and
inference time to expose the cost of increasing the number of
Boolean input bits.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The results are organized around the three research ques-
tions. Section IV-A addresses RQ1 and RQ3 by reporting
reconstruction behavior across datasets and teacher variants.
Section IV-B isolates the effect of LLAV sign-binarization
and ITM reconstruction error. Section IV-C addresses RQ2 by
comparing Booleanization strategies on SVHN and CIFAR10.
Section IV-D shows how the learned ITM clauses can be
mapped back to input regions.
A. Baseline Performances Across Datasets
Table II reports CRISP’s baseline performance across the five
image classification benchmarks using two binary teacher archi-
tectures. Both teachers share the same six-block convolutional
structure and four-layer fully connected stack with a 256-bit
TABLE II: CRISP performance across datasets and two binary
teacher architectures using 8-bit thermometer input encoding.
Teacher
Dataset
Teacher accuracy (%)
ITM test fidelity (%)
BCCNN
MNIST
99.65
85.99
BCCNN
KMNIST
98.86
74.63
BCCNN
FMNIST
94.20
83.92
BCCNN
SVHN
95.01
67.77
BCCNN
CIFAR10
91.06
71.54
BNN
MNIST
98.98
84.31
BNN
KMNIST
96.93
73.71
BNN
FMNIST
87.83
85.10
BNN
SVHN
73.10
73.12
BNN
CIFAR10†
65.39
70.99
†The BNN/CIFAR10 teacher is a re-trained instance using the same BNN
architecture described in Section III-B, as the original run submitted for peer
review was not recoverable.
LLAV, differing only in their binarization strategy. The baseline
reconstruction setting uses an 8-bit thermometer input encoding,
and the reconstruction column reports the test fidelity, which
follows Equation (2): For each hidden neuron, the fraction
of test samples on which the assigned ITM reproduces the
teacher’s binary activation, averaged over the 256 coordinates.
This measurement is computed on held-out inputs rather than
the samples used to train the ITMs, so it reflects generalisation
rather than in-sample fit. As a calibration check, the mean
per-neuron majority-class baseline ranges from roughly 61% to
74% across datasets (mean 65%), which the held-out fidelities
exceed on most settings, so the reported values largely reflect
learned reconstruction rather than trivial majority prediction.
The exception is the low-accuracy BNN/SVHN teacher, whose
reconstruction fidelity sits near its majority baseline.
Two patterns follow from Table II. First, on the datasets
where the teachers are directly comparable, the teacher accuracy
is higher for the BCCNN teacher, which indicates that retaining
real-valued hidden activations between binary weight layers
gives stronger task performance in the reported architecture.
Second, symbolic reconstruction fidelity does not follow teacher
accuracy monotonically, as the BNN produces comparable or
higher held-out fidelity than the BCCNN on FMNIST and
SVHN despite having lower or similar task accuracy. This
distinction matters because CRISP measures recoverability
of the internal code, and not only the quality of the teacher
classifier. In particular, a teacher can be accurate yet harder to
reconstruct if its LLAV coordinates encode more distributed
or spatially abstract evidence.
The MNIST-family datasets generally show higher re-
construction than the harder colour-image settings, as their
class evidence is more closely tied to local stroke or shape
patterns that can be expressed by pixel-threshold clauses,
whereas SVHN and CIFAR10 require more spatial aggregation,
which makes neuron-wise reconstruction from Booleanized
pixels more difficult. KMNIST shows the lowest held-out
fidelity relative to its teacher accuracy, and the injection test
(Section IV-B) shows the same dataset losing the most classifier-
head accuracy, which indicates that its hidden code generalises
less readily to unseen inputs. These results answer RQ1 by
showing that the LLAV can be reconstructed on held-out data


TABLE III: Three-way LLAV injection test with the BNN
teacher and 8-bit thermometer input encoding.
Dataset
Input to fc_out
Accuracy (%)
κ
MCC
MNIST
BNN baseline
98.98
0.9887
0.9887
LLAV binarized
98.98
0.9887
0.9887
ITM reconstruction
84.68
0.8297
0.8302
FMNIST
BNN baseline
87.83
0.8648
0.8649
LLAV binarized
87.83
0.8648
0.8649
ITM reconstruction
78.41
0.7601
0.7623
KMNIST
BNN baseline
96.93
0.9659
0.9659
LLAV binarized
96.93
0.9659
0.9659
ITM reconstruction
58.80
0.5422
0.5422
across all tested settings, with reduced fidelity as the visual
task becomes less aligned with simple local evidence. They
also answer RQ3 by showing that teacher architecture affects
both task accuracy and reconstruction difficulty, but not always
in the same direction.
B. Effect of LLAV Binarization and Reconstruction Error
To isolate the cost of each stage in the symbolic pipeline, a
three-way injection test was conducted using the BNN teacher
and 8-bit thermometer input encoding. The teacher’s final
classifier head (fc_out) was given three different inputs in
turn which are the continuous pre-binarization activation vector
of the penultimate layer, the sign-binarized LLAV, and the ITM
reconstruction of that LLAV. Each input was passed through
fc_out alone, with predictions evaluated against ground-truth
labels on the test set. This test is reported on the MNIST-family
datasets, where the BNN teacher operates near its accuracy
ceiling, and restricting to these datasets isolates the effect
of reconstruction error on the classifier head from teacher
error. Extending the injection test to the lower-teacher-accuracy
SVHN and CIFAR10 settings is left for future work.
The injection test reveals two findings. First, sign-binarizing
the LLAV incurs no accuracy cost in the reported rows,
as the continuous and binary conditions are identical. This
follows from the structure of fc_out as a BinLinear layer,
it applies a sign operation before the linear transform and
therefore discards magnitude information at this interface. In
this setting, the binary LLAV is sufficient for reproducing the
teacher head. Second, ITM reconstruction reduces accuracy
across all reported datasets, with the largest drop on KMNIST.
The main accuracy loss comes from imperfect reconstruction
of the sign pattern, not from LLAV sign-binarization itself.
A reconstruction error in one LLAV coordinate changes the
input seen by fc_out. Since the output layer uses binarized
weights and a sign-encoded input, flipping one LLAV bit
changes each class logit by a fixed signed amount determined
by the corresponding binary output weight [35]. Accumulated
bit errors across the 256-dimensional LLAV can therefore
change the class margin and produce a misclassification. This
reframes CRISP’s bottleneck as the fidelity of the ITM bank
in reproducing the teacher LLAV.
TABLE IV: Effect of Booleanization strategy on ITM recon-
struction fidelity for SVHN and CIFAR10.
Dataset
Enc.
Bits
Input
Bits
Train
acc. (%)
Test
fid. (%)
Inf.
Time (s)
SVHN
Bin
1
3072
82.94
86.03
275.8
SVHN
Th
1
3072
82.66
85.70
274.4
SVHN
Th
2
6144
79.19
79.98
499.1
SVHN
Th
4
12288
81.49
83.82
1231.0
SVHN
Q
1
3072
84.93
87.52
275.7
SVHN
Q
2
6144
82.16
84.06
414.1
SVHN
Q
4
12288
82.05
83.02
1056.0
CIFAR10
Bin
1
3072
92.31
92.08
148.6
CIFAR10
Th
1
3072
92.29
92.04
129.3
CIFAR10
Th
2
6144
91.32
91.45
214.3
CIFAR10
Th
4
12288
91.37
91.47
542.0
CIFAR10
Q
1
3072
92.47
92.12
84.1
CIFAR10
Q
2
6144
91.28
91.39
167.0
CIFAR10
Q
4
12288
91.44
91.54
464.5
C. Effect of Input Booleanization
Table IV reports the effect of Booleanization strategy on
SVHN and CIFAR10. The table includes the encoding (Enc.),
bit depth, encoded input dimension (Input Bits), mean ITM
training accuracy (Train acc.), test-set reconstruction fidelity
(Test fid.), and inference time (Inf. time). Binary thresholding
(Bin) is evaluated only at one bit because it produces one
Boolean feature per scalar input, while thermometer (Th) and
quartile (Q) encodings are evaluated at one, two, and four bits.
Two patterns are visible in Table IV. First, reconstruction
fidelity at one-bit depth is close across all three schemes. On
SVHN, test fidelity ranges from 85.70% to 87.52%, while on
CIFAR10, it ranges from 92.04% to 92.12%. This similarity
is expected, as all three one-bit schemes reduce each scalar
feature to a single threshold test. The threshold is fixed at 0.5
for binary and thermometer encodings, and fitted as a training-
set median for quartile binning. In particular, the one-bit binary
thresholding (Eq. 3) and one-bit thermometer encoding (Eq. 5)
are identical by construction, since both reduce to 1[u >
0.5]. The small difference between their rows in Table IV
(e.g. 86.03% vs. 85.70% on SVHN) reflects only run-to-run
stochasticity in ITM training, which indicates that sub-point
differences elsewhere in the table are within noise. Second,
quartile binning gives the strongest one-bit result on SVHN
(87.52%) where the margin exceeds run-to-run variation. For
CIFAR10, the one-bit schemes are effectively tied (92.12% vs.
92.08%) meaning no encoding is singled out.
Fidelity does not improve monotonically with bit depth.
For both thermometer and quartile encodings, most two-bit
and four-bit settings are lower than the corresponding one-bit
setting. As noted after Equation (5), the highest thermometer
bit is constant by construction, so an nbits code carries fewer
informative bits than its dimension suggests, and the input
dimension grows faster than the useful threshold information
available to the ITMs. The added dimensions also enlarge the
clause search space, which can reduce reconstruction quality
under a fixed training budget.
The timing results show the cost of wider encodings. On
SVHN, thermometer inference time rises from 274.44s at one


Input
(T-shirt/top) 
Positive clauses Xi Negative clauses Xi 
0 
10
71
226
515
Positive clauses Xi 
3625
Negative clauses Xi 
1593
500
69
0
(a) FMNIST T-shirt/top.
Input
(idx 3, label 0) 
Positive clauses Xi Negative clauses Xi 
0 
2 
14 
44 
99 
Positive clauses Xi 
6145 
Negative clauses Xi 
2701
848
117
0
(b) MNIST digit “0”.
Fig. 2: Collective clause evidence pooled across all 256 ITMs for representative test samples. Each panel separates positive-
and negative-polarity clauses and maps positive literals Xi and negated literals Xi back to image coordinates. Color intensity
denotes pooled literal count within each row.
bit to 1231.02s at four bits, while quartile inference time rises
from 275.65s to 1056.01s over the same range. CIFAR10
follows the same trend, but the absolute timings are lower.
These are total wall-clock times over the full test set (Table
I), where per-image latency is on the order of 10–50ms across
the encodings. These results answer RQ2 by showing that
richer Booleanization does not automatically improve LLAV
reconstruction. In the reported experiments, one-bit quartile
binning provides the best fidelity-cost trade-off.
D. Explainable Symbolic Evidence from ITMs
The preceding results quantify whether the ITM bank recon-
structs the teacher’s LLAV. This section applies clause-evidence
pooling, aggregating across all 256 ITMs, to representative test
samples. The two examples in Figure 2 use 8-bit thermometer
encoding on MNIST and FMNIST, matching the baseline
reconstruction setting in Section IV-A.
Although each ITM is trained on a flat vector of pixel-
threshold features, the pooled evidence in Figure 2 forms
spatially coherent maps. This structure arises from training
pressure rather than an explicit spatial prior. An ITM retains
literals that help predict its assigned LLAV bit and discards
literals that do not. In centered image datasets, pixels on or
near the object are more predictive than uniform background
pixels, so pooled literals concentrate around the object region.
The MNIST digit in Figure 2b provides a useful check
because a “0” contains two background regions, namely, the
outside of the digit and the hole inside the loop. The pooled
Xi evidence fills the interior hole as well as the exterior
background, which is consistent with local pixel-threshold
evidence rather than a simple boundary-only pattern. The
FMNIST example in Figure 2a similarly concentrates positive-
literal evidence over the T-shirt silhouette.
The raw scale of the Xi and Xi maps should not be compared
directly. The negated-literal maps have larger counts because
thermometer encoding allows near-zero background pixels to
satisfy several low-threshold negations, while foreground pixels
activate a narrower threshold band near their intensity. Thus, the
spatial location of evidence is interpretable, but the magnitude
gap between positive and negated literal maps should not be
treated as a direct measure of foreground versus background
importance. Negative-polarity clauses contribute less evidence
in the two displayed samples, which is consistent with confident
correct predictions where supporting clauses for the winning
class carry most of the reconstruction signal.
E. Limitations
All results use a single training run per configuration,
where training the full 256-ITM bank is memory-bound as a
complete run on CIFAR10 over all training samples exceeds
24 hours per configuration on our setup, which precludes multi-
seed repetition and formal uncertainty estimation. Small inter-
encoding differences should therefore be read with caution,
as the 0.04-point quartile-over-binary advantage on CIFAR10
detailed in Table IV lies within run-to-run variation and is not
claimed as meaningful, whereas the larger SVHN gap is more
robust. The per-coordinate ITMs are individually small, so the
dominant cost is repeated evaluation of all training samples
across the bank rather than ITM size; sample subsampling,
minibatched clause updates, and scaling the bank beyond 256
coordinates are left to future work. Reconstruction fidelity in
Table II is reported on held-out test data following Eq. (2).
V. CONCLUSION
This paper presented CRISP, a neuro-symbolic framework
that reconstructs the last-layer activation vector of a binary
neural network as propositional clauses, assigning one ITM
to each hidden neuron over a Boolean encoding of the
input (Section II). The surrogate preserves the identity of
every reconstructed coordinate and exposes its supporting
literals, turning the teacher’s final hidden interface into an
inspectable symbolic object. Experiments across five image
benchmarks and two binary teacher architectures show that
reconstruction fidelity is governed by task difficulty and teacher


binarization (Sections IV-A and IV-B). Binarization alone does
not reduce teacher-head accuracy in the tested BNN setting, so
the dominant loss stems from imperfect ITM reconstruction,
while the Booleanization study (Section IV-C) shows that one-
bit quartile binning, rather than higher bit depth, yields the
strongest fidelity-cost trade-off, most clearly on SVHN.
Within the reported scope, LLAV reconstruction is feasible
but harder on complex colour datasets (RQ1), one-bit quartile
binning gives the best fidelity-cost balance (RQ2), and teacher
architecture affects task accuracy and reconstructability inde-
pendently (RQ3). Clause pooling further shows reconstructed
bits forming spatial evidence maps despite the ITMs having
no explicit spatial prior.
VI. FUTURE WORK
Several directions follow from this work. First, reconstruction
could extend from the final hidden interface to intermediate
layers, toward a layer-by-layer clause-level account of the
whole network, potentially with reconstruction-aware teacher
training so hidden representations become recoverable by
construction. Second, clause banks could be coupled with
satisfiability-based verification to state symbolic guarantees
for safety-critical deployment. Finally, the approach could
scale to larger color benchmarks with channel-specific RGB
evidence and imbalance-aware baselines, and generalize to
tabular, sensor, biomedical, and time-series data, where a logic-
native clause bank offers an accurate, low-complexity, and
explainable alternative.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This
work
was
partially
supported
by
the
EPSRC
EP/X036006/1 Scalability Oriented Novel Network of Event
Triggered Systems (SONNETS) project.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature, vol. 521,
no. 7553, pp. 436–444, 2015.
[2] J. Schmidhuber, “Deep learning in neural networks: An overview,” Neural
networks, vol. 61, pp. 85–117, 2015.
[3] S. Gu, B. Kelly, and D. Xiu, “Empirical asset pricing via machine
learning,” The Review of Financial Studies, vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 2223–
2273, 2020.
[4] Z.
C.
Lipton,
“The
mythos
of
model
interpretability,”
Queue,
vol.
16,
no.
3,
pp.
31–57,
2018.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3236386.3241340
[5] O. Tarasyuk, A. Gorbenko, T. Rahman, L. Jiao, O.-C. Granmo, R. Shafik,
and A. Yakovlev, “Learning dynamics, pattern recognition capability and
interpretability of the tsetlin machine,” Pattern Recognition, p. 113028,
2025.
[6] E. C. Erku¸s, C. Özbey, and T. Çolako˘glu, “Artificial intelligence in
technology and innovation: Concerns and future directions,” AIPA’s
International Journal on Artificial Intelligence: Bridging Technology,
Society and Policy, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1–12, 2024.
[7] C. Rudin, “Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high
stakes decisions and use interpretable models instead,” Nature machine
intelligence, vol. 1, no. 5, pp. 206–215, 2019.
[8] G. Montavon, W. Samek, and K.-R. Müller, “Methods for interpreting
and understanding deep neural networks,” Digital signal processing,
vol. 73, pp. 1–15, 2018.
[9] J. Yosinski, J. Clune, Y. Bengio, and H. Lipson, “How transferable
are features in deep neural networks?” Advances in neural information
processing systems, vol. 27, 2014.
[10] G. Alain and Y. Bengio, “Understanding intermediate layers using linear
classifier probes,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.01644, 2016.
[11] Y. Bengio, A. Courville, and P. Vincent, “Representation learning: A
review and new perspectives,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence, vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 1798–1828, 2013.
[12] M. D. Zeiler and R. Fergus, “Visualizing and understanding convolutional
networks,” in European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV).
Springer, 2014, pp. 818–833.
[13] O.-C. Granmo, “The Tsetlin Machine - A Game Theoretic Bandit
Driven Approach to Optimal Pattern Recognition with Propositional
Logic,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.01508, 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1804.01508
[14] M. Courbariaux, I. Hubara, D. Soudry, R. El-Yaniv, and Y. Bengio,
“Binarized Neural Networks: Training Deep Neural Networks with
Weights and Activations Constrained to +1 or -1,” 2016. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1602.02830
[15] I. Hubara, M. Courbariaux, D. Soudry, R. El-Yaniv, and Y. Bengio, “Bi-
narized neural networks,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS 2016), vol. 29.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2016, pp.
4107–4115.
[16] H. Qin, R. Gong, X. Liu, X. Bai, J. Song, and N. Sebe, “Binary neural
networks: A survey,” Pattern Recognition, vol. 105, p. 107281, 2020.
[17] M. Courbariaux, Y. Bengio, and J.-P. David, “Binaryconnect: Training
deep neural networks with binary weights during propagations,” Advances
in neural information processing systems, vol. 28, 2015.
[18] Y. Lecun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, and P. Haffner, “Gradient-based learning
applied to document recognition,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 86, no. 11, pp. 2278–
2324, 1998.
[19] T. Clanuwat, M. Bober-Irizar, A. Kitamoto, A. Lamb, K. Yamamoto, and
D. Ha, “Deep learning for classical japanese literature,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1812.01718, 2018.
[20] H. Xiao, K. Rasul, and R. Vollgraf, “Fashion-mnist: a novel image
dataset for benchmarking machine learning algorithms,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1708.07747, 2017.
[21] Y. Netzer, T. Wang, A. Coates, A. Bissacco, B. Wu, and A. Y.
Ng, “Reading Digits in Natural Images with Unsupervised Feature
Learning,” in NIPS Workshop on Deep Learning and Unsupervised
Feature
Learning,
vol.
2011,
2011,
p.
5.
[Online].
Available:
http://ufldl.stanford.edu/housenumbers/
[22] A. Krizhevsky, “Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images,”
University of Toronto, Technical Report, 2009.
[23] K. Simonyan, A. Vedaldi, and A. Zisserman, “Deep inside convolutional
networks: Visualising image classification models and saliency maps,”
2014. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6034
[24] S. M. Lundberg and S.-I. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting model
predictions,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 30,
2017.
[25] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “" why should I trust you?"
explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in Proceedings of the 22nd
ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and
data mining, 2016, pp. 1135–1144.
[26] P. W. Koh, T. Nguyen, Y. S. Tang, S. Mussmann, E. Pierson, B. Kim,
and P. Liang, “Concept bottleneck models,” in International conference
on machine learning.
PMLR, 2020, pp. 5338–5348.
[27] A. Shmuel, N. Koren, O. Glickman, and T. Lazebnik, “Interpretable
knowledge distillation via symbolic regression for feedforward neural
networks,” Neural Computing and Applications, vol. 38, no. 7, p. 243,
2026.
[28] C. Kinateder, U. Anjum, and J. Zhan, “Distribution-enhanced knowledge
distillation,” Neurocomputing, p. 133605, 2026.
[29] A. d. Garcez and L. C. Lamb, “Neurosymbolic ai: The 3 rd wave,”
Artificial Intelligence Review, vol. 56, no. 11, pp. 12 387–12 406, 2023.
[30] J. Buckman, A. Roy, C. Raffel, and I. Goodfellow, “Thermometer
encoding: One hot way to resist adversarial examples,” in International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018.
[31] Y. G. ter, O.-C. Granmo et al., “An optimized toolbox for advanced
image processing with tsetlin machine composites,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.00704, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.
00704
[32] B. P. Bhuyan, A. Ramdane-Cherif, R. Tomar, and T. Singh, “Neuro-
symbolic artificial intelligence: a survey,” Neural Computing and
Applications, vol. 36, no. 21, pp. 12 809–12 844, 2024.
[33] J. R. Dettori and D. C. Norvell, “Kappa and beyond: is there agreement?”
Global spine journal, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 499–501, 2020.


[34] D. Chicco and G. Jurman, “The advantages of the matthews correlation
coefficient (mcc) over f1 score and accuracy in binary classification
evaluation,” BMC genomics, vol. 21, no. 1, p. 6, 2020.
[35] M. Rastegari, V. Ordonez, J. Redmon, and A. Farhadi, “Xnor-net:
Imagenet classification using binary convolutional neural networks,” in
European conference on computer vision.
Springer, 2016, pp. 525–542.
