Graph Machine:
Exploring Edge Mechanisms as an Inductive Bias
Lintai Hou
lintai@iterlabs.ai
Abstract
Transformers provide a powerful architecture for global content-based matching,
but reasoning problems may benefit from a stronger inductive bias toward itera-
tive traversal of latent relations. We introduce Graph Machine, an architecture
with two explicit edge-based mechanisms: Edge-augmented attention, in which
edges modulate attention between nodes, and edge-centric referral, in which nodes
exchange addresses to update their edges. Conceptually, this enables the model
to dynamically and differentiably construct and revise relational graphs across
layers. We study this inductive bias using Sudoku under controlled settings and
find that Graph Machine outperforms Transformer baselines, with ablation studies
and mechanistic analysis attributing the gains to the edge mechanisms. Surpris-
ingly, we found that the model discovers a compact edge-based construction for
Sudoku geometry. Our results support explicit edge mechanisms as a promising
architectural design, motivating broader evaluation.
Preprint.
arXiv:2608.06834v1  [cs.LG]  7 Aug 2026


1
Introduction
Most ML architectures, including Transformers1 and graph neural networks (GNNs)2,3, can be viewed
as operating over nodes that aggregate information from other nodes before applying node-wise
operations. This view raises a question: from which other nodes should a node absorb information?
Modern architectures commonly answer this question through some combination of global content-
based matching and iterative relational traversal. The former is exemplified by dot-product self-
attention, which selects nodes based on their features. The latter, by contrast, relies on edges, whether
explicit or implicit, to propagate information through a relational structure. A directed edge can be
understood as carrying the addresses of its target nodes, and potentially also features that describe the
relation between the source and the target.
We hypothesize that the relative ease of global content-based matching versus iterative relational
traversal constitutes an important inductive bias in architectural design. Systems like large language
models (LLMs)4 are known to favor surface heuristics over latent constraints5. Among many
examples of what is described as shortcut learning, one demonstrates it with particular clarity: “I want
to wash my car. The car wash is 50 meters away. Should I walk or drive?” An LLM often answers
“walk” by treating the problem as a familiar distance-focused question and attending to the salient
distance cue. The correct answer, however, is to drive, because the car itself must be brought to the car
wash6. Global content-based matching gives a model broad reach and rich representational capacity,
but it also makes shallow shortcuts immediately available. Iterative relational traversal, by contrast,
may be better aligned with reasoning over latent relations and may regularize against content-based
shortcuts. If this prior holds, then making the latter easy becomes a central desideratum.
However, we argue that architectures like Transformers and GNNs often do the opposite. One
important reason is the lack of an edge-centric referral mechanism. Such a mechanism would
encourage the model to pass not only messages between nodes, but also addresses. These addresses
could then be used to construct new edges for the next information aggregation step. Intuitively, this
allows nodes to fetch a neighbor’s neighbor by letting the neighbor provide the referral.
GNNs commonly model edges directly by providing each node with a set of neighbors, which the
node then uses for message passing. However, the topology is typically fixed, or dynamic only
through a procedure that is external to the model’s own computation. A GNN may be forced to
operate over a graph structure that is not amenable to the computation the model wishes to perform,
and therefore suffers from linearly depth-limited receptive fields, 1-WL expressivity7 bound, and
oversquashing8.
By contrast, dot-product self-attention in Transformers directly supports global content-based match-
ing. Although self-attention may have enough capacity to implement iterative relational traversal and
referral, it makes these operations difficult in three ways: limited addressing precision, noisy address
channels, and competition with global content-based matching.
First, dot-product attention retrieves nodes through dot products in a dk-dimensional key/query
space. Viewing exact node addresses as one-hot vectors in an n-dimensional address space, this can
be interpreted as preserving address distinguishability in a dk-dimensional geometry, suggesting a
trade-off between dimension and distortion analogous to Johnson–Lindenstrauss-type bounds9.
Second, fetched addresses must be carried through the value stream and subsequent feed-forward net-
works. These transformations are useful for representation learning, but noisy for exact bookkeeping:
an address should ideally be forwarded without modification.
Third, global content-based matching and iterative relational traversal/referral share the same in-
frastructure, forcing them to compete for dimensions, heads, and optimization pressure. Thus, the
balance between the two modes of computation is determined by implicit trade-offs, leaving no
explicit control to bias the model toward the latter.
This work introduces Graph Machine (GM), an architecture that directly supports edge-centric
referral while generalizing Transformers in expressivity. Graph Machines update node features
through edge-augmented attention and construct new edges through edge-centric referral.
In controlled Sudoku experiments, Graph Machines outperform same-scale and prior-advantaged
Transformer baselines, while remaining comparable to substantially enlarged and prior-advantaged
Transformer baselines. Mechanistic analysis suggests that this advantage reflects the intended
2


inductive bias. Starting from only local adjacency edges, GM learns to construct higher-level Sudoku
relations, including box, row, and column regions, through a compact edge-based construction that
resembles a 1-2-4 expansion process. This provides evidence that the model is not merely fitting
Sudoku solutions, but using referral to build task-relevant latent graph structure.
These results suggest that explicit edge mechanisms can provide a useful inductive bias for structured
reasoning tasks.
2
Architecture
Figure 1: GM representations.
Figure 2: GM layers.
Figure 3: GM edge sublayer.
Figure 4: GM node sublayer.
2.1
Architecture overview
We conceptualize a Graph Machine as operating on a graph with n nodes, where each node maintains
k outgoing edge slots (Figure 1). In addition to node features of shape n × dn, the model maintains
edge features of shape n × k × de and edge addresses of shape n × k × n, where dn and de denote
the node and edge hidden sizes, respectively. The edge addresses represent target mass: each edge
assigns weights over the n target nodes.
The initial edge features and edge addresses are provided by the input layer, either by converting
task-specific input graphs or through priors such as k past neighbors in the case of sequence modeling
(Figure 2). Each intermediate layer of a Graph Machine consists of one or more edge sublayers
followed by one or more node sublayers, allowing many-to-one or one-to-many arrangements. Edge
sublayers update edge representations using edge-centric referral, followed by a position-wise feed-
forward network that updates edge features (Figure 3). Node sublayers update node features using
edge-augmented attention followed by their own position-wise feed-forward network (Figure 4).
Viewed through a programming analogy, node features act like an object’s general state, while each
edge slot resembles a relational field that stores both relation-specific state and a soft pointer. Each
3


object can traverse its pointers to reach target objects, fetch their states and pointers, and use the
retrieved information to revise its own pointers while updating its general and relational states.
Another way to view Graph Machines is through relational composition. For an ordinary graph with
adjacency matrix P, the composition operator ◦is defined by matrix multiplication: P ◦P = P 2.
Graph Machines generalize relational representation from connectivity to multiple feature-bearing
soft edges. The edge representation is a pair (Xe, Pe), where Xn and Xe stores node and node-
relation-specific features and Pe is edge addresses, equivalently k row-normalized soft adjacency
matrices. Edge-centric referral then implicitly defines a learned differentiable composition operator
⋄θ over this representation: (X′
e, P ′
e) = ⋄θ(Xn, Xe, Pe).
Figure 5: Edge-augmented attention tensor operations (1 head).
2.2
Edge-augmented attention
Standard multi-head dot-product self-attention computes attention logits from queries and keys
projected from node features (Xn). Graph Machines retain this term as a node factor (Fnode), but
augment it with an edge factor (Fedge) derived from edge features (Xe) and edge addresses (Pe). The
final attention weights are a product-of-experts10 combination between the factors, so that node-based
content affinity and edge-based relational evidence jointly shapes the target map.
For simplicity, we henceforth omit the head dimension and denote a node-edge-node-edge-node
chain by (n1, e1, n2, e2, n3), where n1 is the source node, e1 is an edge of the source node, n2
is a target node, and e2 is an edge of the target node. Queries (Q) are projected from n1 features,
while the standard attention keys are projected from n2 features; under the chain notation above, we
refer to them as n2 keys (Kn2). To produce the edge factor, the same n1 queries attend over e1 keys
(Ke1), which are projected from the k edge features associated with e1. The corresponding edge
addresses are used as values, yielding a mixture of edge-address distributions over target nodes (Ae1).
To convert this mixture into logit space, we then take the logarithm of this target mass after clipping
4


away from 0 with a small ε. Concretely,
Ae1(n1, e1) = softmaxe1
Q(n1) Ke1(n1, e1)⊤
√dak

,
Medge(n1, n2) =
X
e1 Ae1(n1, e1) Pe(n1, e1, n2),
Fedge(n1, n2) = log

max
 Medge(n1, n2), ε

,
Fnode(n1, n2) = Q(n1) Kn2(n2)⊤
√dak
.
The node and edge factors are multiplied by learned temperature scalars projected from node features
and parameterized by a positive function such as exp or softplus (tnode and tedge). This allows the
model to modulate the relative strength of the two experts. Summing the 2 factors and applying a
softmax over the target-node dimension gives the final attention weights. The mechanism is at least
as expressive as standard Transformer attention: vanilla self-attention is recovered by setting the
edge-factor temperature to 0, so that the edge expert contributes a uniform distribution. Concretely,
A(n1, n2) = softmaxn2

tnode(n1) Fnode(n1, n2) + tedge(n1) Fedge(n1, n2)

,
Z(n1) =
X
n2 A(n1, n2) V (n2).
We visualize the tensor operations during one head of the edge-augmented attention mechanism in
Figure 5 and provide simplified code in Section A.1.
2.3
Edge-centric referral
Edge-centric referral constructs a new set of edges by composing two-hop n1 →n2 →n3 chains
into single-hop n1 →n3 edges with new features and addresses.
During edge-centric referral, the k new edges play a dimensional role analogous to attention heads.
Because self-connections are representable in Graph Machines, the mechanism does not preclude
preserving existing edges.
Referral shares its early computational pattern with edge-augmented attention. The queries produce
node and edge factors over possible intermediate nodes n2, denoted the n2 node factor (Fn2,node)
and n2 edge factor (Fn2,edge), while the attention weights over the original e1 edge slots are retained
as e1 weights (Ae1). The same queries also attend over the outgoing e2 edge slots of each n2 to
produce an e2 factor (Fe2). Combining the n2 node factor, n2 edge factor, and e2 factor with learned
temperatures yields logits over referred edges; applying a softmax gives e2 weights (Ae2). These
weights define a distribution over candidate e2 edges. The corresponding n2 weights (An2) are
obtained by summing the e2 weights over the e2 edge dimension. By contrast, a different variant
would first compute n2 weights and then multiply them by softmax-normalized e2 factors, thereby
modeling a conditional distribution over e2 given n2. Concretely, after early analogous operations,
Fe2(n1, n2, e2) = Q(n1) Ke2(n2, e2)⊤
√drk
,
Ae2(n1, n2, e2) = softmaxn2, e2

tn2,node(n1) Fn2,node(n1, n2)
+ tn2,edge(n1) Fn2,edge(n1, n2)
+ te2(n1) Fe2(n1, n2, e2)

,
An2(n1, n2) =
X
e2 Ae2(n1, n2, e2).
The new edge features are obtained by taking weighted sums of the values associated with e1, n2,
and e2 (Ve1, Vn2, and Ve2), using their respective weights, then adding the results and projecting back
to the edge hidden dimension. The new edge addresses are computed by weighting the addresses of
5


Figure 6: Edge-centric referral tensor operations (1 head).
the e2 edges with the e2 weights. Consequently, edge addresses would remain convex combinations
of previous addresses absent the sharpening procedure. Concretely,
Zx(n1) =
X
e1 Ae1(n1, e1) Ve1(n1, e1)
+
X
n2 An2(n1, n2) Vn2(n2)
+
X
n2, e2 Ae2(n1, n2, e2) Ve2(n2, e2),
Zp(n1, n3) =
X
n2, e2 Ae2(n1, n2, e2) Pe(n2, e2, n3).
We visualize the tensor operations during one head of the edge-centric referral mechanism in Figure 6
and provide simplified code in Section A.2.
2.4
Sharpening
Because Shannon entropy H(·) is concave in the edge address distribution Pe, Jensen’s inequality
gives
H
 X
n2, e2 Ae2(n1, n2, e2) Pe(n2, e2, ·)

≥
X
n2, e2 Ae2(n1, n2, e2) H
 Pe(n2, e2, ·)

,
where Ae2(n1, n2, e2) ≥0 and P
n2, e2 Ae2(n1, n2, e2) = 1. Thus, repeatedly forming weighted
averages of edge addresses during referral can dilute the target mass of the resulting edges.
6


To counteract this effect, Graph Machines apply an edge-sharpening operation at the start of edge and
node sublayers. This operation performs learned temperature scaling on edge addresses: each edge
address is mapped to logit space by taking the logarithm, scaled by a learned temperature (tsharpener)
projected from edge features and parameterized by a positive temperature function, and renormalized
with a softmax. Concretely,
Le(n1, e1, n2) = log

max
 Pe(n1, e1, n2), ε

,
P ′
e(n1, e1, n2) = softmaxn2

tsharpener(n1, e1) Le(n1, e1, n2)

.
In edge sublayers, one could use separate sharpener temperatures for the two roles played by edge
addresses: one version for producing n2 edge factors and another as the e2 address being collected.
For simplicity, we use a single sharpener temperature for both roles.
2.5
Computational optimizations
A direct implementation of the conceptual algorithm incurs an O(n2) memory footprint and an
O(n3) compute cost in the number of nodes n. These costs arise from materializing an n × h × n
weight tensor for each batch element in attention and an n × k × n × k weight tensor in referral, and
performing matrix multiplication between the weight tensor and an n × k × n address tensor during
referral. Two natural optimization strategies reduce this cost by reducing the footprint of the edge
addresses.
The first direction is to compress edge addresses into a lower-dimensional representation and re-
cover them with a linear decoder during attention and referral. Because a vanilla compression-
decompression process does not respect the simplex constraint, it is more natural to represent the
edge address in logit space instead of weight space (we present the results on edge address space
without compression in Section C). This requires interpreting edge-address aggregation steps as also
a product-of-experts operation rather than a mixture. In this setting, the edge factors can be computed,
together with the node factors, through dot products between queries concatenated with compressed
target edge addresses and keys concatenated with the decoder matrix. This makes the mechanism
compatible with FlashAttention-style kernels11.
The second direction is to sparsify edge addresses to contain only the top-s entries, storing them in
a sparse coordinate format and utilizing sparse operations (scatter/gather) during referral and
attention. This allows the memory footprint to be O(n) and computational cost to be O(n2), as long
as edge factor temperatures are enforced away from 0 so that attention/referral weights inherit the
sparsity of edge addresses. Each edge-address aggregation step requires coalescing, and to maintain
sparsity, subsequent selection, either via hard top-s or probabilistic Gumbel-top-s. Additionally, s
could potentially differ between various operations. In contrast to vanilla Transformers with dynamic
dense interactions and sparse Transformers with fixed routing, a sparse Graph Machine would provide
sparse but dynamic attention. We present preliminary simulated sparsification results in Section C.
One limiting case is where edges become hard and referral amounts to assigning weights to at most
k2 neighbor candidates and selecting k of them. With such hardened edges, optimization becomes
more difficult: referral is no longer fully differentiable, and would need reinforcement-learning-style
estimators such as policy gradients. In this sense, GM can be viewed as a soft generalization of hard
referral, allowing varying degrees of edge softness so that gradients can flow through the referral
process.
A further optimization is to avoid requiring each of the k heads to attend separately to each of the k
e2 edges of an n2 node during referral. Instead, the model can first aggregate edge addresses for each
head using a procedure analogous to e1 aggregation, reducing the n × k × n × k memory cost to
n × k × n.
3
Experiments
3.1
Experimental setup
Our experimental design follows the principle of controlled comparison: we isolate the causal effects
of the variables of interest by keeping all other factors fixed. All GM and Transformer conditions are
7


therefore considered instances of a generalized model class and share the same model and training
implementation, with configurations kept at their default except for those relevant to the experiments.
We use a deliberately simple setup and avoid many straightforward optimizations; for example,
increasing model size or training steps would improve performance but offer little additional insight.
We use the Sudoku-3M dataset from Kaggle12,13 as our benchmark, which contains 3M Sudoku
puzzles with 23 to 26 clues and varying levels of difficulty. Controlling the task prior given to
the model is crucial, since the prior can strongly influence both the task the model faces and its
performance. At one extreme, Sudoku can be solved entirely by human-engineered symbolic
algorithms, without using a neural network. As we intend to use Sudoku to test a model’s capability
to use input relations to construct relations amenable to reasoning, relations such as the Sudoku
constraint regions should not be made readily available. Therefore, our standard task prior is defined
as local information: for each cell, knowledge of the cell itself and of its four adjacent neighbors.
We use a single model pass for both training and testing. Each of the 81 cells is treated as a node
(n = 81), with 8 edges per node (k = 8). In conditions with edges, the initial edges point to the cell
itself and its four adjacent neighbors; the remaining edge slots, up to 5 for corner cells, are assigned
to empty edges. Edge features are initialized from learned embeddings of the edge category: self,
up, down, left, right, or empty. Initial edge addresses place all mass on the target cell for non-empty
edges and distribute mass uniformly over all cells for empty edges. Node features are initialized by
adding two learned embeddings: one for the cell content, which is either blank or one of 1, . . . , 9, and
one for the cell position, with each of the 81 positions treated as a separate category. Prediction logits
are produced from the final node embeddings. Cross-entropy loss is applied only to logits at blank
positions, and then averaged over puzzles and subsequently batches. We report board accuracy as our
main metric, where a board is considered correct if and only if each blank cell is predicted correctly.
We use a tiny model that is relatively narrow and deep, motivated by Sudoku’s requirement for
multi-step reasoning. For our default configuration, the node hidden size dn and edge hidden size de
are 64 and 8, respectively; the number of layers l is 32, with each layer containing 1 edge sublayer
and 1 node sublayer. Both the edge degree, equivalently the number of referral heads, k and the
number of attention heads h are 8, and the referral key size drk and the attention key and value sizes
dak and dav are all 8. The detailed default configuration for all conditions is provided in Section B.
In general, we follow current best practices for Transformers.
Each run uses a single NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 GPU with 24 GB of VRAM and generally
completes in under 15 hours. We use integers starting from 0 as random seeds, randomizing the
model initialization, the train-evaluation-test split, and the epoch shuffling. Conditions in Section 3.2
use 10 seeds; all other conditions use 3 seeds. Parenthesized conditions in later sections are equivalent
to one of the main conditions in Section 3.2 (up to numerical error), so their values are taken from the
corresponding 10-seed averages.
3.2
Comparison against baselines
Table 1: Comparison against baselines.
Condition
Scale Node embed.
Attention
# params Acc (%, µ ± σ (max))
Transformer
1×
Each
Node
2.12M
71.7 ± 3.2 (76.1)
Transformer-static
1×
Each
Node, edge
2.16M
1.8 ± 1.9 (5.1)
Transformer-sin-PE⋆
1×
Each, sin PE
Node
2.12M
81.5 ± 0.5 (82.3)
Transformer-sin-PE-2x⋆
2×
Each, sin PE
Node
16.87M
86.3 ± 2.5 (88.6)
GM
1×
Each
Node, edge
2.70M
86.0 ± 3.7 (87.9)
We compare Graph Machines against several Transformer-based baselines.
Transformer
We include a standard Transformer as one of our baselines. To maintain symmetry
with GM conditions, we retain factor temperature and auxiliary entropy losses even in baseline
conditions, where attention contains only the node factor. Ablations suggest that these choices do not
materially affect Transformer performances; see Section C and C.
8


Transformer-static
For the Transformer-static condition, we disable edge referral by removing
edge sublayers. The given input edge embeddings and edge addresses are therefore not updated, but
are still used by edge-augmented attention. This condition remains a generalization of Transformer
in expressivity: since empty edges with even mass distribution are supplied, the model can construct
a uniform edge expert, effectively adding a constant term to attention scores, therefore not limiting
message passing to the given topology.
Transformer-sin-PE
For the Transformer-sin-PE condition, we provide the Transformer with 2D
positional information through sinusoidal positional embeddings1 with base 10,000 at the input layer.
This is the best-performing positional embeddings option for Transformer among sinusoidal, rotary14,
and row-column factorized positional embeddings schemes of various bases (Section C).
Transformer-sin-PE-2x
We include a scaled-up Transformer with 2D sinusoidal position embed-
dings as a stronger comparison, using models that are 2× wide in hidden size and head dimension
sizes and 2× deep in number of layers.
These conditions provide useful isolation of the relevant factors. The comparison between GM and
Transformer isolates the overall effect of edge representations and mechanisms, while the comparison
between GM and Transformer-static isolates the edge-updating referral mechanism. Transformer-sin-
PE examines the effect of task priors by making 0 to 8-hop positional information directly accessible
at input, from which the Sudoku constraint regions can be easily derived, even though this arguably
removes much of the challenge of constructing useful relations from given ones, which was our
intention when choosing Sudoku as the benchmark and local information as our task priors. Together
with an experiment where we project input edges into the node feature space (Section C), they remove
or reverse the effect of the 0 to 1-hop positional task priors given to GM. Finally, the scaled-up
Transformer-sin-PE-2x provides a generous baseline with advantaged task priors and approximately
8× the parameter count.
Results in Table 1 show that GM outperforms Transformer, Transformer-static, and Transformer-
sin-PE, while remaining competitive with Transformer-sin-PE-2x. The Transformer-static condition
yields an average per-cell accuracy of 77.3%, moderately lower than Transformer’s 96.3%, with this
discrepancy amplified under the per-board accuracy metric.
Transformer-static’s poor performance, together with the first three ablation studies, presents an inter-
esting picture. Several conditions are equally or more expressive than the models they underperform:
Transformer-static relative to Transformer, GM with RoPE relative to GM, and 5-edge-degree GM
and 4-edge-sublayer GM relative to Transformer. The natural interpretation is that our architectural
changes introduce inductive biases that can materially move models into different regimes, and that
these regimes yield gains only when they are both sufficiently supported and advantageous. The
similar accuracy of GM and the strongest Transformer baseline may therefore reflect two distinct
regimes being pushed near the limit under our task and setup, rather than a lack of meaningful effect
from inductive bias.
3.3
Ablation studies
Positional encoding
We add the best performing sinusoidal and rotary positional embeddings
schemes (evaluated on Transformer, Section C) to GM. Results (Table 2) show that sinusoidal PE
appears to slightly improve GM performance to be on par with Transformer-sin-PE-2x. On the other
hand, consistent with our unreported preliminary experiments, RoPE appears to stably decrease GM’s
performance to Transformer-RoPE level shown in Section C. We theorize that RoPE may compete to
supply positional information during attention, resulting in a regime that underperforms relative to
when edges are used in that role by the model.
Table 2: Positional encoding.
Positional encoding
Accuracy (%)
Sin PE, base 10000
86.4
RoPE, base 10
76.5
None (GM)
86.0
Table 3: Edge degree.
Degree
Accuracy (%)
0 (Transformer)
71.7
5
63.2
8 (GM)
86.0
9


Edge degree
The edge degree k controls the sparsity of the edge representation and affects referral
compute at rate k2. In addition to an edge degree of 0 conceptually represented by the Transformer
baseline, we test an edge degree of 5, the smallest value that can accommodate the five provided
non-empty edges (up, down, left, right, self) in the input graph. Interestingly, lower-degree GM
appears to underperform relative to both endpoints (Table 3).
Number of edge sublayers
The ratio of edge to node sublayers controls the relative amount of
computation allocated to message passing and address passing. The Transformer-static condition can
be viewed as the limiting case with no edge sublayers, so edge representations are never updated. We
test the effect of varying the number of edge sublayers while fixing the number of node sublayers to
32. Performance decreases with fewer edge sublayers, with a trend of diminishing returns toward the
upper range (Table 4). The average for the 16-edge-sublayer condition is skewed by seed 1’s outlier
performance of 51.5%, compared with 79.1% and 85.9% for seeds 0 and 2, respectively.
Table 4: Number of edge sublayers.
# edge sublayers
Accuracy (%)
0 (Transformer-static)
1.8
4
59.7
8
83.3
16
72.2
32 (GM)
86.0
Table 5: Attention experts.
Experts
Accuracy (%)
Node (Transformer)
71.7
Node & edge (GM)
86.0
Edge
28.1
Attention experts
Standard attention in Transformer uses only the node expert, whereas edge-
augmented attention in GM combines the node and edge experts. To complete the picture, we also test
a variant that uses only the edge expert. The edge-only variant underperforms the node-only variant,
while both single-expert conditions underperform the GM double-expert condition, suggesting that
node and edge experts provide complementary utility (Table 5).
Sharpener temperature
We compare several parameterizations of the sharpener temperature: a
fixed value shared across layers and edges, learned values per edge and layer, and projections from
edge features at each layer. Performance decreases under the alternative parameterizations, suggesting
that feature-dependent sharpening is better in our setting (Table 6).
Table 6: Sharpener temperature.
Sharpener temperature
Accuracy (%)
Fixed = 0 (Transformer)
71.7
Fixed = 1 - off
77.5
Fixed = 1.1
76.8
Fixed = 1.5
72.5
Learned values per edge
80.8
Learned projection from edge features (GM)
86.0
Factor temperatures
Factor temperatures allow the model to modulate the relative contribution of
node and edge experts. Turning off factor temperatures reduces performance, suggesting that adaptive
weighting between the two factors is beneficial (Table 7).
Table 7: Factor temperatures.
Factor temperatures
Accuracy (%)
Off
60.6
On (GM)
86.0
Table 8: Entropy losses.
Entropy losses
Accuracy (%)
Off
84.5
On (GM)
86.0
Entropy losses
Preliminary experiments suggest that small entropy losses on the edge and node
n2 factors of both edge and node sublayers, each with weight starting at 10−3 and annealed linearly
10


to 0, reduce performance variability early in training. We also observe a slight but non-significant
improvement in final performance attributed to the entropy losses (Table 8).
3.4
Mechanistic analysis
Figure 7: Seed 0, test batch 0, sample 0: puzzle, solution, and predictions (GM-0 and T-0).
The explicit edge representations and mechanisms lend GM to self-interpretability. Various variables
in each sublayer are weights over the target nodes, which in our experiments correspond to the
81 Sudoku cells. These variables include edge addresses, attention/referral edge/node factors, and
attention/referral weights. To visualize the representations and mechanisms, we record these variables
during the testing of the final models and plot them as heatmaps.
We restrict this analysis to the GM and Transformer conditions from Section 3.2, using seed 0, test
batch 0, and samples 0–15. We focus primarily on one pre-specified source cell, r2c2, located at
the center of the top-left box, and extend the analysis to two additional cells, r2c5 and r5c2, where
relevant. Throughout this section, we use 0-based indexing and refer to the two examined models as
GM-0 and T-0. We treat each consecutive pair of an edge sublayer and a node sublayer as a layer. We
use the term referral head to denote the new-edge-producing dimension during referral; s, l, and e
to denote sample, layer, and edge; a and r to denote attention and referral; and address-in to denote
edge addresses after sharpening in either a or r. For example, referral head s0l0r0 produces an edge
address that becomes two address-in variables after sharpening: s0l0e1r in the edge sublayer and
s0l0e1a in the node sublayer.
Our analysis focuses mainly on sample 0, which both GM-0 and T-0 solve correctly (Figure 7).
Figure 8: GM-0 constructs edges representing constraint regions in early layers.
In early layers, GM-0 builds Sudoku geometry from the input edges through a process resembling
how convolutional neural networks compose elementary filters into more complex shapes15 (Figure 8).
11


For the examined node r2c2, referral head 2 in layer 0 uses the up, self, and down edges to construct
an edge factor corresponding to a vertical 3 × 1 rectangle containing r1c2, r2c2, and r3c2. It then
uses this factor to fetch the left and right edges of the up and down neighbors. The fetched corner
cells complete the box region representing the box constraint of r2c2. Across all 16 samples, the
model consistently uses referral head l0r2 and the resulting l1e2 edges for the box constraint.
Similarly, the model obtains the 1 × 9 rectangle corresponding to the row constraint region through
the l3e2 edge, and the 9 × 1 rectangle corresponding to the column constraint region through the
l3e4 edge. It does so by fetching edges from cells near the middle of the row or column, namely r2c5
or r5c2 (Figure 15). These middle-of-row/column cells appear to serve as providers of the row and
column regions for cells aligned with them (Figure 16). This is natural given their centrality: they are
the only cells that can reach both ends of a row or column, and therefore provide the complete region
by the third layer using edge traversal alone.
They can do so by recursively reaching for the farthest available cells in each direction, in coordination
with other nodes. At layer 0, the 1-distance neighbors are provided as input. At layer 1, the 2-distance
neighbors are fetched as the 1-distance neighbors’ 1-distance neighbors. At layer 2, the 4-distance
neighbors are fetched as the 2-distance neighbors’ 2-distance neighbors. Although the model could in
principle memorize each full row or column region, the observed pattern is consistent with a simpler
and more general 1-2-4 construction process shared across such nodes. This exemplifies that, unlike
standard GNNs, GMs have exponential rather than linear reach on the input graph given layer, and
that explicit edge mechanisms may support stronger generalization under relational tasks.
Two additional phenomena merit discussion. First, the partial edges formed during this process,
namely the horizontal l2e5 edge and vertical l2e1 edge, also appear in source cells that are not
middle-of-row/column cells (Figure 16). Thus, they appear to be byproducts of the 1-2-4 construction
applied broadly across nodes. They may be fully useful only at middle-of-row/column cells, while
remaining harmless or weakly beneficial elsewhere.
Second, GM-0 appears to locate the middle-of-row/column target cells through different mechanisms
for rows and columns. For the row region, it seems to rely on the e2 factor; for the column region, it
relies on a joint contribution from the n2 edge and node factors (Figure 15). This holds even when
the target cell is the source cell itself, as in the case of r2c5 fetching its own edge for the row region.
Figure 9: GM-0 composes existing regions through self-referral to produce more complex regions.
The row and column regions are further composed into a cross region, represented by the l4e0 edge,
which later combines with the box region to form a fused cross-box region (Figure 9). As permitted
by the inclusion of self-edges, these regions are constructed and maintained through self-referral: the
model retrieves its own previous edges using a referral edge factor concentrated on the source cell
itself.
Unexpectedly, rather than preserving a self-edge across layers as the basis for self-referral, the
model often adopts a more efficient strategy. It composes existing non-self edges and applies a high
edge-factor temperature to obtain a factor sharply concentrated on the source cell, thereby using one
fewer edge slot while preserving the functional effect. Across the 16 samples, GM-0 generally does
not maintain explicit self-edges beyond the second layer.
Apart from these fixed constructions, many of GM-0’s edges are input-adaptive, suggesting that the
model also represents abstract relations (Figure 10; additional examples are shown in Figures 17
and 18).
12


Figure 10: GM-0’s edges are input-adaptive (excerpt).
Figure 11: GM-0’s edge and node factors specialize in relational and content-based roles, respectively
(excerpt).
13


While GM-0’s edge factors seem to focus on relations, such as constraints, without encoding content
preference, such as given or inferred digits, its node factors seem to match content without encoding
relations. This produces scattered patterns with no apparent geometric structure (Figure 11; additional
examples are shown in Figure 19). Often, the pattern of a node factor closely matches cells associated
with a particular digit.
This suggests that, as intended, the model uses a division of labor between the two experts, which are
then combined through a PoE to specify the attention or referral target. In most cases, the resulting
attention/referral weights appear to receive substantial contributions from both factors, although
either expert can sometimes dominate. Overall, across GM models, edge factors contribute more
strongly to target specification: their normalized entropies average 0.741, compared with 0.891 for
node factors, during attention, and 0.402, compared with 0.945, during referral (Table 17).
Figure 12: T-0 struggles to combine relational and content-based roles in early-to-middle layers
(excerpt).
In contrast, T-0’s node factors, which are the sole contributors of attention weights, appear to struggle
to fulfill both roles (Figure 12; additional examples are shown in Figure 20). In early layers, although
their node factors can attend based on both content and simple relational information, such as row,
column, and box constraint regions, they appear to struggle with relations beyond these simple groups,
as well as with combining relational and content-based information. In the final layers, T-0 appears
to combine relational and content-based information in a primitive manner, although its attention
remains less global and less interpretable than that of GM-0 (Figure 21).
Overall, attention in the Transformer models tends to be less sharp than in the GM models, with an
average normalized entropy of 0.736, compared with 0.652 for GM (Table 17). Since our Sudoku
instances can usually be solved using rudimentary “Singles” techniques16, these weaker attention
patterns may still suffice for many examples, narrowing the performance gap with GM. This highlights
the need to test on tasks with a more complex relational structure.
4
Related works
Many Transformer and attention variants, such as Graphormer17, incorporate notions of edges, rela-
tions, or graphs. However, much of this work treats these as auxiliary to the node representation and
mechanisms. Graph Machine is instead situated among architectures that make edges a first-class
component of the model through explicit and dynamic edge states. Some representative exam-
ples include Edge Transformers18, Edge-augmented Graph Transformers (EGT)19, and relational
attention20. Among this category of architectures, GM differs along four dimensions.
First, GM preserves the node-centric Transformer pathway. For example, our edge-augmented
attention allows joint contribution from both node factors and edge factors. This makes GM a
more direct expressivity generalization of Transformers and enables it to apply naturally beyond
graph-specific settings.
14


Second, GM uses a factorized edge state. Many edge-state architectures maintain representations of
shape n × n × de, assigning a dense vector to every ordered pair of nodes. GM instead represents
edges using edge features of shape n × k × de and edge addresses of shape n × k × n. This can
be viewed as a generalization of the dense pairwise edge state: a dense n × n × de representation
corresponds to n edge slots per node with one-hot addresses over destinations. This separates what
an edge contains from where it points, makes edge addresses directly interpretable as target mass,
exposes edge degree as another controllable architectural inductive bias, and clarifies ways to reduce
the cost of edge referral through address compression or sparsification.
Third, GM differs in how edges shape information aggregation between nodes. Rather than allowing
edge representations to enter global content-based matching in an unconstrained manner, GM uses
node and edge features to aggregate edge addresses, which then directly modulate attention. This
biases the edge pathway toward relational traversal, while leaving global content-based matching
primarily to the node pathway.
Fourth, GM differs in how edge states are updated. Alternative mechanisms do not explicitly support
edge referral or regularize against rich contributions from the node pathway. Our referral mixes
edge addresses across node and edge-slot dimensions, such that new edge addresses are weighted
combinations of previous edge addresses prior to sharpening.
Sudoku has also been used as a benchmark for relational and iterative reasoning. Recurrent Relational
Networks21 inject a strong task prior by constructing a graph in which each cell is connected to
cells in the same row, column, and box. More recent recurrent reasoning architectures, including the
Hierarchical Reasoning Model22 and Tiny Recursive Model23, evaluate on harder Sudoku variants
using Transformer modules applied recurrently for many steps. Our use of Sudoku is different: we do
not provide a full hand-specified Sudoku constraint graph and only use a simple pass of the model.
5
Conclusion and limitations
We introduced Graph Machine, a neural architecture that represents graphs through both node
features and dynamic edge representations. By combining edge-augmented attention and edge-centric
referral, the model can use soft graph structure during node updates while also revising that structure
across layers. In controlled Sudoku experiments, GM improves over standard-scale Transformer
baselines and remains competitive with enlarged Transformer variants, suggesting that explicit edge
representations and mechanisms can improve relational reasoning.
The main limitation of the current implementation is computational cost. Dense and uncompressed
edge addresses yield cubic time complexity and quadratic memory footprint. Future work should
aim for more efficient referral mechanisms, including with sparse edge addresses and operations.
Because GM factorizes edge features and edge addresses, it provides a natural interface for such
approximations.
Our evaluation is also limited to Sudoku. Sudoku is useful as a controlled relational benchmark,
but its latent graph structure is superficial, concrete, fixed, and regular. This can favor Transformer
baselines, since the latent structure can be relatively easily memorized via node embeddings. GM may
be more advantageous in settings where useful relations are latent, abstract, dynamic, and complex.
Additionally, Sudoku places unusually high demands on dense working memory: humans often
require help from verbal rehearsal and pencil marks to solve Sudoku puzzles. Thus, although edge
address distributions are broad in our experiment, it remains worth examining whether this pattern
persists in tasks with more typical working-memory demands.
More broadly, our results motivate continued exploration of edge mechanisms as architectural
inductive biases. We hypothesize that such mechanisms may help improve abstraction, reasoning, and
generalization, capabilities that remain important challenges for current machine learning systems.
Graph Machine offers an initial step in this direction.
15


References
[1] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention Is All You Need, August 2023.
[2] Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-Supervised Classification with Graph Convolutional
Networks, February 2017.
[3] Petar Veliˇckovi´c, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Liò, and Yoshua
Bengio. Graph Attention Networks, February 2018.
[4] Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz
Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec
Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language Models are Few-Shot Learners, July
2020.
[5] Yubo Li, Lu Zhang, Tianchong Jiang, Ramayya Krishnan, and Rema Padman. The Model Says
Walk: How Surface Heuristics Override Implicit Constraints in LLM Reasoning, April 2026.
[6] Kévin (@knowmadd@mastodon.world). https://mastodon.world/@knowmadd/116072773118828295,
February 2026.
[7] Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How Powerful are Graph Neural
Networks?, February 2019.
[8] Uri Alon and Eran Yahav. On the Bottleneck of Graph Neural Networks and its Practical
Implications, March 2021.
[9] William B. Johnson and Joram Lindenstrauss. Extensions of Lipschitz mappings into a Hilbert
space. In Richard Beals, Anatole Beck, Alexandra Bellow, and Arshag Hajian, editors, Contem-
porary Mathematics, volume 26, pages 189–206. American Mathematical Society, Providence,
Rhode Island, 1984.
[10] Geoffrey E. Hinton. Training Products of Experts by Minimizing Contrastive Divergence.
Neural Computation, 14(8):1771–1800, August 2002.
[11] Tri Dao, Daniel Y. Fu, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. FlashAttention: Fast
and Memory-Efficient Exact Attention with IO-Awareness, June 2022.
[12] 3 million Sudoku puzzles with ratings. https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/radcliffe/3-million-
sudoku-puzzles-with-ratings.
[13] Blagovest Dachev. Dachev/sudoku, March 2026.
[14] Jianlin Su, Yu Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Bo Wen, and Yunfeng Liu. RoFormer: Enhanced transformer
with rotary position embedding. CoRR, abs/2104.09864, 2021.
[15] Matthew D. Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and Understanding Convolutional Networks.
In David Fleet, Tomas Pajdla, Bernt Schiele, and Tinne Tuytelaars, editors, Computer Vision –
ECCV 2014, pages 818–833, Cham, 2014. Springer International Publishing.
[16] HoDoKu:
Solving Techniques - Singles (Hidden Single, Naked Single, Full House).
https://hodoku.sourceforge.net/en/tech_singles.php.
[17] Chengxuan Ying, Tianle Cai, Shengjie Luo, Shuxin Zheng, Guolin Ke, Di He, Yanming Shen,
and Tie-Yan Liu. Do Transformers Really Perform Bad for Graph Representation?, November
2021.
[18] Leon Bergen, Timothy J. O’Donnell, and Dzmitry Bahdanau. Systematic Generalization with
Edge Transformers. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, November 2021.
16


[19] Md Shamim Hussain, Mohammed J. Zaki, and Dharmashankar Subramanian. Global Self-
Attention as a Replacement for Graph Convolution. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pages 655–665, August 2022.
[20] Cameron Diao and Ricky Loynd. Relational Attention: Generalizing Transformers for Graph-
Structured Tasks, March 2023.
[21] Rasmus Berg Palm, Ulrich Paquet, and Ole Winther. Recurrent Relational Networks, November
2018.
[22] Guan Wang, Jin Li, Yuhao Sun, Xing Chen, Changling Liu, Yue Wu, Meng Lu, Sen Song, and
Yasin Abbasi Yadkori. Hierarchical Reasoning Model, August 2025.
[23] Alexia Jolicoeur-Martineau. Less is More: Recursive Reasoning with Tiny Networks, October
2025.
[24] Biao Zhang and Rico Sennrich. Root Mean Square Layer Normalization, October 2019.
[25] Noam Shazeer. GLU Variants Improve Transformer, February 2020.
[26] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization, January
2017.
17


A
Simplified codes
A.1
Simplified code for edge-augmented attention
def edge_augmented_attention(n1_queries, e1_keys, e1_addresses, n2_keys, n2_values):
"""
Args:
n1_queries
(b, h, n,
d_ak): queries projected from n1’s node features.
edge_factor_temps (b, h, n
): temps
projected from n1’s node features.
node_factor_temps (b, h, n
): temps
projected from n1’s node features.
e1_keys
(b, h, n, K,
d_ak): keys
projected from e1’s edge features.
e1_addresses
(b,
n, K,
n
):
e1’s edge addresses.
n2_keys
(b, h,
n, d_ak): keys
projected from n2’s node features.
n2_values
(b, h,
n, d_av): values
projected from n2’s node features.
Rets:
outs
(b, h, n,
d_av): attention outputs for
n1’s node features.
Einsum symbols:
[b, h, n, k, m, a/d ]
"""
# Raw factors
e1_scores
= einsum("bhnd,bhnkd->bhnk", n1_queries, e1_keys) / d_ak**0.5
# b, h, n, k
e1_weights
= softmax(e1_scores, dim=-1)
# b, h, n, k
edge_raw_factors = log(einsum("bhnk,bnkm->bhnm", e1_weights, e1_addresses))
# b, h, n, n
node_raw_factors = einsum("bhnd,bhmd->bhnm", n1_queries, n2_keys) / d_ak**0.5
# b, h, n, n
# Factors
edge_factors = edge_raw_factors * edge_factor_temps.unsqueeze(-1)
# b, h, n, n
node_factors = node_raw_factors * node_factor_temps.unsqueeze(-1)
# b, h, n, n
# Weights
logits
= edge_factors + node_factors
# b, h, n, n
weights = softmax(logits, dim=-1)
# b, h, n, n
# Outs
outs = einsum("bhnm,bhmd->bhnd", weights, n2_values)
# b, h, n, d_av
return outs
Figure 13: Simplified code for edge-augmented attention.
18


A.2
Simplified code for edge-centric referral
def edge_centric_referral(n1_queries, ..., e2_addresses):
"""
Args:
n1_queries
(b, k, n,
d_rk): queries projected from n1’s node features.
n2_edge_factor_temps (b, k, n
): temps
projected from n1’s node features.
n2_node_factor_temps (b, k, n
): temps
projected from n1’s node features.
e2_factor_temps
(b, k, n
): temps
projected from n1’s node features.
e1_keys
(b, k, n, k,
d_rk): keys
projected from e1’s edge features.
e1_values
(b, k, n, k,
d_e ): values
projected from e1’s edge features.
e1_addresses
(b,
n, k,
n
):
e1’s edge addresses.
n2_keys
(b, k,
n,
d_rk): keys
projected from n2’s node features.
n2_values
(b, k,
n,
d_e ): values
projected from n2’s node features.
e2_keys
(b, k,
n, k, d_rk): keys
projected from e2’s edge features.
e2_values
(b, k,
n, k, d_e ): values
projected from e2’s edge features.
e2_addresses
(b,
n, k, n
):
e2’s edge addresses.
Rets:
feature_outs
(b, k, n,
d_e ): referral outputs
for
e1’s edge features.
address_outs
(b, k, n,
n
): referral outputs
for
e1’s edge addresses.
Einsum symbols:
[b, h, n, k, m, l, a/d ]
"""
# Raw factors
*_, d_rk
= n1_queries.shape
e1_scores
= einsum("bhnd,bhnkd->bhnk",
n1_queries, e1_keys) / d_rk**0.5
# b, k, n, k
e1_weights
= softmax(e1_scores, dim=-1)
# b, k, n, k
n2_edge_raw_factors = log(einsum("bhnk,bnka->bhna", e1_weights, e1_addresses))
# b, k, n, n
n2_node_raw_factors = einsum("bhnd,bhmd->bhnm",
n1_queries, n2_keys) / d_rk**0.5
# b, k, n, n
e2_raw_factors
= einsum("bhnd,bhmld->bhnml", n1_queries, e2_keys) / d_rk**0.5
# b, k, n, n, k
# Factors
n2_edge_factors = n2_edge_raw_factors * n2_edge_factor_temps.unsqueeze(-1)
# b, k, n, n
n2_node_factors = n2_node_raw_factors * n2_node_factor_temps.unsqueeze(-1)
# b, k, n, n
e2_factors
= e2_raw_factors
* e2_factor_temps.unsqueeze(-1).unsqueeze(-1)
# b, k, n, n, k
n2_factors
= n2_edge_factors + n2_node_factors
# b, k, n, n
# Weights
e2_logits
= n2_factors.unsqueeze(-1) + e2_factors
# b, k, n, n, k
e2_weights = softmax(dim=(-1, -2))
# b, k, n, n, k
n2_weights = e2_weights.sum(dim=-1)
# b, k, n, n
# Outs
e1_feature_outs = einsum("bhnk,bhnkd->bhnd",
e1_weights, e1_values)
# b, k, n, d_e
n2_feature_outs = einsum("bhnm,bhmd->bhnd",
n2_weights, n2_values)
# b, k, n, d_e
e2_feature_outs = einsum("bhnml,bhmld->bhnd", e2_weights, e2_values)
# b, k, n, d_e
feature_outs
= e1_feature_outs + n2_feature_outs + e2_feature_outs
# b, k, n, d_e
address_outs
= einsum("bhnml,bmla->bhna",
e2_weights, e2_addresses)
# b, k, n, n
return feature_outs, address_outs
Figure 14: Simplified code for edge-centric referral.
19


B
Default configurations
For our default configurations, we follow common Transformer design choices, using RMSNorm24,
no bias, and SwiGLU25 activation function. Both the feed-forward networks in the edge and node
sublayers have an expansion factor of 4. We use as our temperature function a horizontally shifted
softplus that maps 0 to 1.
Training uses PyTorch automatic mixed precision via torch.autocast. Adam optimizer26 is used
with (β1, β2) of (0.9, 0.95), no weight decay, a 1% warmup, a peak learning rate of 10−3, and a
cosine schedule down to 10%. Gradient clipping with max grad norm of 1.0 is applied.
Train-eval-test split on the dataset is redrawn for each run with proportions 0.9-0.05-0.05. 100k steps
are performed with batch size of 64 each, corresponding to 2.37 epochs over the train set; each epoch
reshuffles the dataset. Testing is done with the entirety of the test split at the end of each run.
C
Additional experiments and statistics
Transformer - project input edges
We test a Transformer condition where we project the initial
edge embeddings and edge addresses to the node feature space in the input layer. We do so by
1. perform weighted sum of the learned node embeddings using the initial edge addresses as
weights for each edge,
2. concatenate with the edge embeddings for each edge,
3. pass through an MLP for each edge,
4. and add to the node embeddings.
Results (Table 9) suggest this procedure is not advantageous in our case.
Table 9: Transformer - project input edges.
Base configuration
Project input edges
Accuracy (%)
Transformer
On
60.1
Off (Transformer)
71.7
Transformer-sin-PE-2x - factor temperatures
On top of the Transformer-sin-PE-2x condition,
we test the effect of removing factor temperatures. Results (Table 10) suggest that this seems to
slightly improve performance.
Table 10: Transformer-sin-PE-2x - factor temperatures.
Base configuration
Factor temperatures
Accuracy (%)
Transformer-sin-PE-2x
On (Transformer-sin-PE-2x)
86.3
Off
83.7
Transformer-sin-PE-2x - entropy losses
On top of the Transformer-sin-PE-2x condition, we test
the effect of removing entropy losses. Results (Table 10) suggest that this does not seem to materially
alter performance.
Table 11: Transformer-sin-PE-2x - entropy losses.
Base configuration
Entropy losses
Accuracy (%)
Transformer-sin-PE-2x
On (Transformer-sin-PE-2x)
86.3
Off
87.6
20


Transformer - positional encodings
We test a range of 2D positional encoding options, including
RoPE of various bases, sinusoidal PE of various bases, as well as a learned row-column factorized
PE, where a node inherits the sum of the learned embeddings of its row and column. Our experiments
suggest that sinusoidal PE with a base of 10000 performs the best among our conditions (Table 10).
Among RoPE conditions, base 10 is best, which we label as Transformer-RoPE to offer comparison
with GM-RoPE in Section 3.3.
Table 12: Transformer - positional encodings.
Base configuration
Positional encodings
Accuracy (%)
Transformer
Off (Transformer)
71.7
RoPE, base 10 [Transformer-RoPE]
75.9
RoPE, base 100
67.7
RoPE, base 1000
74.1
RoPE, base 10000
71.2
Sinusoidal PE, base 10
77.1
Sinusoidal PE, base 100
80.3
Sinusoidal PE, base 1000
80.2
Sinusoidal PE, base 10000 (Transformer-sin-PE)
81.5
Learned row-column factorized PE
74.6
GM - edge address space
We test a variant of GM where we let edge addresses represent logits
directly, by removing the conversion to and from weight space when logits are needed. During input,
to convert the input edge-address weights to logits, we simply multiply the weights by a chosen
factor of 5. As a result, the uniform weights of the empty edges convert to uniform logits and thus
distribution, and edge addresses with a single-cell support convert to a distribution where the mass on
the intended cell is e5 ≈148.41 larger than that of any other cell. Results (Table 13) indicate that
this reduces the performance to around Transformer level.
Table 13: Edge address space.
Base configuration
Edge address space
Accuracy (%)
GM
Weight (GM)
86.0
Logit
72.3
GM - address sparsity
We conduct preliminary experiments on address sparsity by varying sparsity
s, simulated using our dense algorithm and representation by masking non-top-s entries to 0 along
the last dimension of edge addresses. We optionally use a Gumbel-top-s temperature τ for our
selection by adding Gumbel noise to our address logits before selecting the top s of the original
logits and renormalizing. In our implementation, we do not further sparsify the edge factors or
mask the attention/referral weights to maintain the top-s sparsity. We find that sparsification yields
promising results, where a sparsity of 16 yeilds similar performance to Transformer; however, using
Gumbel-top-s without annealing seems to yield no benefit (Table 14). What remains future work
includes enforcing sparsity on attention/referral weights for potentially significant efficiency benefits,
and where we anneal s and/or τ for potentially improved optimization.
GM and Transformer - some statistics
We offer some statistics on the GM and Transformer
conditions. Factor entropies are logged after applying the factor temperatures. In-addresses are
the input addresses after sharpening, while out-addresses are the output addresses after the referral
process.
21


Table 14: GM - address sparsity.
Base configuration
s
τ
Accuracy (%)
GM
0 (Transformer)
0.0
71.7
1
0.0
36.2
4
0.0
50.9
16
0.0
70.3
81 (GM)
0.0
86.0
4
0.01
27.5
4
0.1
30.4
4
1.0
53.6
Table 15: Mean sharpener temperatures.
Condition
Edge sublayer
Node sublayer
GM
1.050
1.098
Table 16: Mean factor temperatures.
Condition
Edge sublayer
Node sublayer
N2 edge
N2 node
E2
Edge
Node
Transformer
\
\
\
\
0.871
GM
15.374
0.287
3.386
1.096
0.861
Table 17: Factor mean normalized entropies.
Condition
Edge sublayer
Node sublayer
N2 edge
N2 node
E2
Weight (N2)
Edge
Node
Weight
Transformer
\
\
\
\
\
0.736 = 0.736
GM
0.402
0.945
0.731
0.368
0.741
0.891
0.652
Table 18: Address mean normalized entropies.
Condition
Edge sublayer
Node sublayer
In-address
Out-address
In-address
GM
0.692
0.712
0.715
D
Additional mechanistic analysis figures
This section collects some additional mechanistic analysis figures.
22


Figure 15: GM-0 uses different mechanisms to target r2c5 and r5c2, consistently across source cells.
23


Figure 16: GM-0 applies the 1-2-4 construction broadly, including in cells that are not middle-of-
row/column.
24


Figure 17: GM-0’s edges are input-adaptive (early-layer).
25


Figure 18: GM-0’s edges are input-adaptive (late-layer).
26


Figure 19: GM-0’s edge and node factors specialize in relational and content-based roles, respectively.
27


Figure 20: T-0 struggles to combine relational and content-based roles in early-to-middle layers.
28


Figure 21: GM-0 and T-0 differ in late-layer attention weights: GM-0’s attention appears more global
and more interpretable.
29
