Title: On the Independence Assumption in Neurosymbolic Learning

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=S1gSrruVd4

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# On the Independence Assumption in Neurosymbolic Learning 

Emile van Krieken 1 Pasquale Minervini 1 Edoardo M. Ponti 1 Antonio Vergari 1

## Abstract 

State-of-the-art neurosymbolic learning systems use probabilistic reasoning to guide neural net-works towards predictions that conform to logical constraints over symbols. Many such systems as-sume that the probabilities of the considered sym-bols are conditionally independent given the input to simplify learning and reasoning. We study and criticise this assumption, highlighting how it can hinder optimisation and prevent uncertainty quantification. We prove that loss functions bias conditionally independent neural networks to be-come overconfident in their predictions. As a re-sult, they are unable to represent uncertainty over multiple valid options. Furthermore, we prove that these loss functions are difficult to optimise: they are non-convex, and their minima are usu-ally highly disconnected. Our theoretical analysis gives the foundation for replacing the conditional independence assumption and designing more ex-pressive neurosymbolic probabilistic models. 

## 1. Introduction 

Neurosymbolic learning studies neurosymbolic models that combine neural perception and symbolic reasoning (Man-haeve et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2018; Badreddine et al., 2022). These models use logical constraints and data to create a loss function for learning neural perception models (Giunchiglia et al., 2022). When used effectively, neurosymbolic learning methods can use these constraints to improve data efficiency. However, researchers in the neurosymbolic learning commu-nity have found optimising the parameters of the perception models challenging (Marconato et al., 2023a; van Krieken et al., 2022; Manhaeve et al., 2021). A major underlying reason is that neurosymbolic learning cannot provide exact feedback on how the neural perception model should behave. We highlight this issue with a simple example. 

> 1

School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh. Correspon-dence to: Emile van Krieken <Emile.van.Krieken@ed.ac.uk >.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine Learning , Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by the author(s). r, g 

## ¬r, g r, ¬g

## ¬r, ¬gp1

## p2

> All minima Minima under independence

Figure 1. The conditional independence assumption discards valid and potentially meaningful solutions. The tetrahedron (a 3-dimensional probability simplex) represents the distributions over the options of the problem in Example 1.1: r refers to the red light and g to the green light. The green triangle represents distri-butions that assign zero probability to r ∧ g. The blue lines are the distributions in the green triangle that an independent distribution can represent. The left (resp. right) blue line represents the distri-butions where the probability of r (resp. g) is zero. Independent distributions cannot represent distributions in the dotted green line, such as p2 that assigns equal probability to only the green or only the red light being on.minimaimmoralia 

Example 1.1. We consider a perception model responsible for recognising the red and green lights on a traffic light. It sees a traffic light that it believes to be simultaneously red and green. A constraint specifies this is impossible, and the neurosymbolic loss should penalise this. There are three possible worlds: the model can output that the red light is on, the green light is on, or neither. How do we choose among these? The set of all beliefs can be represented by the tetrahedron in Figure 1. We argue that the perception model should be able to express uncertainty over these three worlds, as there is no evidence to conclude which one is correct. This corresponds to the distributions in the green triangle at the bottom of the figure. We should leave determining any further preference to the provided data as the constraint only specifies what worlds are possible but does not specify which one is correct .The majority of probabilistic methods for neurosymbolic learning rely on a strong assumption: namely, that the differ-1On the Independence Assumption in Neurosymbolic Learning 

ent symbols of the world are independent when conditioned on input data (Manhaeve et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2018). This means that for some input image, a conditionally indepen-dent perception model predicts two probabilities: one for the green light being on and one for the red light being on. What do we lose when we take this conditional indepen-dence assumption? There is recent experimental evidence that suggests that using expressive perception models over conditionally independent ones improves performance on neurosymbolic tasks (Ahmed et al., 2022a; 2023; Pryor et al., 2023). We theoretically justify these results: the conditional independence assumption causes neurosymbolic methods to be biased towards deterministic solutions. This is because minima of neurosymbolic losses have to deterministically assign values to some variables. For instance, in Figure 1, the blue lines represent distributions that state that either the red light is off or the green light is off. With the goal of better understanding the impact of the conditional independence assumption, we provide a com-putable characterisation of what can be represented. We find that we can characterise this problem faithfully using tools from logic (Quine, 1959) and computational homology (Kaczynski et al., 2004), and prove that this bias towards determinism holds generally. Furthermore, our characteri-sation shows that the conditional independence assumption can lead to training objectives that are challenging to op-timise due to heavily disconnected minima. Our analysis provides theoretical justifications for the benefits of using more expressive perception models: the ability to properly express uncertainty and smooth, convex loss landscapes. 

## 2. Background and Notation 

Probabilistic Neurosymbolic Learning. We consider a probabilistic neurosymbolic learning (PNL) setting, where a probabilistic neural perception model pθ (w|x) with pa-rameters θ defines a distribution over worlds w ∈ { 0, 1}n

(often called concepts (Barbiero et al., 2023; Marconato et al., 2023a)) given high-dimensional inputs x ∈ X . A constraint φ : {0, 1}n → { 0, 1} is a boolean function on worlds w. We say a world is possible if φ(w) = 1 and assume φ has at least one possible world. The next example illustrates this setting. 

Example 2.1 (Learning with algorithms) . MNIST Addi-tion is a popular benchmark task in neurosymbolic learning (Manhaeve et al., 2021). X is the set of pairs of MNIST images. We represent worlds w with n = 20 variables 

{w1,0, ..., w 1,9, w 2,0, ..., w 2,9}, where wi,j denotes the ith digit taking the value j. We have a set of labels represent-ing possible sums Y = {0, . . . , 18 }. The constraints φy

enforce that exactly one of w1,j and one of w2,k is true, and ensures the pair of digits sums to the correct output: 

φy (w) = ∃j,k ∈{ 0,..., 9}(j + k = y) ∧ w1,j ∧ w2,k . Here, the constraints φy are parameterised by an observed output 

y ∈ Y , which changes between inputs x.We compute the probability that the model pθ (w|x) satisfies the constraint φ1 for input x with: 

pθ (φ = 1 |x) = X

> w∈{ 0,1}n

pθ (w|x)φ(w). (1) Equation 1 is known as the (conditional) weighted model count (WMC) in probabilistic and logical reasoning (Chavira and Darwiche, 2008). The pθ (w|x) term can be under-stood as a data-dependent factor that assigns probabilities to different worlds, while the φ(w) term is a constraint-dependent factor that filters out impossible worlds. Most loss functions based on WMC (Xu et al., 2018; Manhaeve et al., 2021) minimise the negative logarithm of the WMC 

L(θ; x) = − log pθ (φ = 1 |x), often called the semantic loss . See Section 6 for a discussion on these methods. The majority of current PNL approaches assume that the probabilities pθ (wi = 1 |x) of variables wi being true are independent when conditioned on x. Then, perception mod-els only have to predict n parameters in [0 , 1] n instead of a parameter for each of the 2n worlds, i.e., 

pθ (w|x) := 

> n

Y

> i=1

pθ (wi|x). (2) We call this the (conditional) independence assumption .2

PNL systems take advantage of this assumption to speed up inference, reduce the number of trainable parameters, and ease implementation (Xu et al., 2018; Manhaeve et al., 2021; van Krieken et al., 2023; Ahmed et al., 2022a). 

Example 2.2 (Semi-supervised learning with constraints) .

A common application of neurosymbolic learning is semi-supervised learning of the perception model pθ . Here, we have a labelled dataset Dl = {(xi, wi)}|D l| 

> i=1

and an unla-belled dataset Du = {xi}|D u| 

> i=1

. Here, φ is a conjunction of a set of constraints ϕi that relate the symbols in the world 

w. The semantic loss L(θ) over the unlabelled data Du is often added as a regularisation term to a supervised loss function to bias the neural network towards solutions that predict possible worlds (Xu et al., 2018).     

> 1With abuse of notation, we use the symbol φboth for the boolean function encoding the knowledge and for a binary random variable of the knowledge being true or not.
> 2In the rest of the paper, we refer to this conditional inde-pendence assumption as just “the independence assumption” for readability.

2On the Independence Assumption in Neurosymbolic Learning 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

p(r)

> 0.00.20.40.60.81.0
> p(g)

Semantic loss   

> Figure 2. The loss landscape of the semantic loss for the traffic light problem – brighter (resp. darker) regions correspond to higher (resp. lower) semantic loss values.

## 3. The issues with the independence assumption 

The main problem in our setting is how to learn the per-ception model pθ (w|x). The underlying assumption in neurosymbolic learning is that there is a true distribution over worlds p∗(w|x). This distribution is unknown, and we cannot directly sample from p∗(w|x) to train pθ (w|x).Instead, the feedback neurosymbolic learning methods pro-vide is through the constraint φ, which induces a set of possible worlds Wφ = {w ∈ { 0, 1}n | φ(w) = 1 }. If the constraint is correct, then all worlds w with non-zero probability p∗(w|x) are in Wφ. Therefore, neurosymbolic learning methods should use the constraint φ as a filter on what worlds are possible. We aim to answer the follow-ing questions: can particular parameterisations of pθ (w|x)

implicitly bias the selection of possible worlds instead of just filtering out impossible ones? And if so, how does this hinder their ability to recover p∗(w|x) via learning? 

3.1. The independence assumption biases towards deterministic solutions 

First, we show that common neurosymbolic learning meth-ods are biased towards deterministic solutions. Returning to Example 1.1, consider a simple setup with w consisting of two binary variables r and g representing a red and green light, and a constraint φ = ¬r ∨ ¬ g which asserts that the red and green lights cannot be on simultaneously. In the remainder of the paper, we will fix the input x and keep it implicit in our notation unless necessary. Using our formula φ in Equation 1, we then get: 3         

> 3With some abuse of notation, we consider rand ¬gas events, that is, p(r, ¬g) := p(r= 1 , g = 0) .

pθ (φ = 1) = pθ (¬r, ¬g) + pθ (¬r, g ) + pθ (r, ¬g)= 1 − pθ (r, g ). (3) We can maximise this probability by simply enforcing 

pθ (r, g ) = 0 . Then, the distribution over the remaining worlds can be arbitrary – such distributions are represented by the green triangle in Figure 1. However, taking the inde-pendence assumption over variables, we get: 

pθ (φ = 1) = 1 − pθ (r) · pθ (g).

We plot the semantic loss for an independent distribution in Figure 2 as a function of pθ (r) and pθ (g). The semantic loss has its minima at the lines pθ (r) = 0 and pθ (g) = 0 , biasing the model towards deterministically choosing either the red or green light being off, even though there is no evidence available to conclude this. Therefore, when optimising this function, we will come to a deterministic conclusion, which is wrong in a fraction of cases that depends on the real-world distribution of red and green lights being on. Furthermore, an independent distribution cannot represent the beliefs p1 and p2 highlighted in Figure 1, where p1 is the uniform belief over the three possible worlds, while p2

is the equal belief in only the red light being on or only the green light being on. In fact, we cannot represent any distribution that assigns a non-zero probability to either just the red or the green light being on: if the semantic loss is minimised, then an independent distribution cannot represent uncertainty among multiple equally valid options. Does this bias towards determinism happen for all formulas 

φ? We prove that this is indeed the case using the concept of implicants (Quine, 1959): an implicant assigns values to a subset of the variables {wi}ni=0 such that it ensures the constraint φ is true. In our example, ¬r is an implicant of 

φ, since both ¬r ∧ g and ¬r ∧ ¬ g are possible worlds. Our first theorem, which is formalised and proven in Section 4.2, generalises this result to all formulas φ:

Theorem 3.1 (Implicants determine minima, informal) . An independent distribution pθ (w) minimises the semantic loss if and only if it is deterministic for some variables, and those variables form an implicant of φ.

We can, therefore, use the logical concept of implicants to study to what optima independent distributions converge. If the implicants are very restrictive, this greatly decreases the number of minima. The more restrictive the implicants of the formula are, the more the independent distributions will be biased towards deterministic solutions, and the less they will be able to quantify uncertainty. 3On the Independence Assumption in Neurosymbolic Learning 

3.2. Minima under independence assumption are non-convex and disconnected 

Using the connection to implicants from Theorem 3.1, we develop a geometric characterisation of the independent dis-tributions that minimise the semantic loss. We emphasise that we study convexity and connectedness in the space of probability vectors over worlds, and not in the space of the parameters of the model θ. Our characterisation allows for an in-depth study of its topology using the tools of compu-tational homology (Kaczynski et al., 2004). This allows us to give the exact conditions on the constraints φ for which the minima are convex and connected. These conditions are valid only when we severely limit the types of constraints we can use. Therefore, the resulting semantic loss functions are usually highly non-convex and disconnected, and so difficult to optimise. In contrast, for expressive distributions, the semantic loss is always convex, as we show in Section 4.4. 

Theorem 3.2 (Convexity, informal) . The semantic loss is convex over the set of independent distributions only when the constraint φ is a formula of the form VLi=1 li, where each li is a literal (a variable or its negation). 

We discuss this in detail in Section 4.4.2. The intuition behind this result is that such formulas provide direct su-pervision on L variables, and give no supervision on the remaining n − L variables. Therefore, the loss function is convex over the L variables, and the remaining n − L

variables can be chosen arbitrarily. Note that this is a very restrictive condition: In many neurosymbolic settings, we have no direct supervision, and the constraint just acts as a filter on what worlds are possible. 

Theorem 3.3 (Connectedness, informal) . The independent distributions that minimise the semantic loss are connected only if the implicants of the constraint φ form a connected graph between worlds. 

In Section 4.4.3, we define a graph where the vertices are the possible worlds Wφ that are connected when there is an implicant that “covers” both worlds. If this graph is connected, then so are the minima. This result is quite abstract, so we provide two examples to illustrate it. For the traffic light example, the graph is connected: The three possible worlds are connected through the implicants ¬r

and ¬g. However, for the MNIST Addition task (Example 2.1), the graph contains no edges at all, which implies that the minima are a set of disconnected vertices. 

## 4. Characterising minima of the semantic loss 

In this section, we will develop the mathematical machinery to be able to characterise what it means for a distribution to be a minimum of the semantic loss, and, in particular, for independent distributions. Section 4.1 discusses the expressivity of distributions and in-troduces our notation. Section 4.2 characterises the minima of the semantic loss for independent distributions. Sec-tion 4.4.1 studies a minimal representation of those minima. Finally, Section 4.4.2 shows when this set is convex, and Section 4.4.3 when this set is connected. Both turn out to be very rare. We provide proof sketches for most theorems in the main text and leave the full proofs to Appendix G. For ease of reading, we provide a table of notation in Table 1. 

4.1. Expressive distributions 

The expressiveness of a perception model pθ (w|x) (Ahmed et al., 2022a) intuitively refers to how many distributions over worlds it can represent. A fully expressive perception model can represent any distribution p(w|x).The set of all joint distributions over worlds is the (2 n − 1) -(probability) simplex having the standard unit vectors ei

as vertices: ∆ = {P2n 

> i=1

αiei : P2n 

> i=1

αi = 1, α ≥

0} ⊂ R2n

. The vertices ei are one-hot representations of the worlds wi ∈ { 0, 1}n. We fix an arbitrary order-ing w1, ..., w2n throughout. All probability distributions 

p considered in this paper then correspond to the vector 

(p(w1), . . . , p (w2n )) in ∆. With abuse of notation, we say p ∈ ∆, referring to p as both this vector and a distribu-tion. We define possible distributions p ∈ ∆ as a distribution that assigns all probability mass to possible worlds. An equivalent statement is that p(w) = 0 for all impossible worlds w ∈ { 0, 1}n \ W φ (Marconato et al., 2023b). The 

set of all possible distributions ∆φ ⊆ ∆ is a (|W φ| − 1) -simplex formed from the standard unit vectors associated with the possible worlds Wφ. Since ∆φ is a simplex, it is a convex set. Furthermore, the semantic loss L(p) is convex over the set of distributions ∆ since the WMC is linear (see Appendix E for a proof). An expressive parameterisation θ 7 → pθ of the joint distri-bution can represent any distribution p ∈ ∆: For each input 

x ∈ X , there is a parameter θ such that p(w) = pθ (w|x).A (parameter-inefficient) fully expressive parameterisation is to predict a vector of 2n logits, which is then mapped to 

∆ via softmax. Expressive parameterisations behave quite differently in the example discussed in Section 3.1. They can minimise the probability of the constraint φ in Equation 3 by simply setting pθ (r, g ) = 0 , and model any preference over the remaining three worlds. This prevents the model from having to deterministically choose that either the red or green light is off and allows it to represent uncertainty. 4On the Independence Assumption in Neurosymbolic Learning 

4.2. When do independent parameterisations satisfy the constraint? 

We next study the properties of independent distributions that satisfy the constraint. An independent distribution pμ is characterised by parameters μ4 in the n-hypercube [0 , 1] n,where μi is the probability that wi is true. To be precise, 

pμ(wi) = μwi 

> i

·(1 −μi)1−wi is the probability mass function of the Bernoulli random variable wi. We now formally define implicants (Quine, 1959), which are related to the deterministic components of μ:

Definition 4.1 (Deterministic assignments) . A probability 

μi ∈ [0 , 1] is deterministic if μi ∈ { 0, 1}. Otherwise, μi

is stochastic , that is, μi ∈ (0 , 1) . A partial assignment 

wD = {wi}i∈D assigns values {0, 1} to a subset of the variables w indexed by D ⊆ { 1, . . . , n }. The deterministic assignment of an independent distribution pμ is the partial assignment wD = {μi}i∈D defined by its deterministic factors D = {i|μi ∈ { 0, 1}} .

Definition 4.2 (Implicants) . We define the cover WwD ⊆{0, 1}n of a partial assignment wD as the set that contains all worlds w ∈ { 0, 1}n that equal wD on the variables in D.A partial assignment wD is an implicant of φ if its cover only contains possible worlds. That is, wD |= φ.Intuitively, an implicant assigns values to a subset of the variables in w such that it ensures the constraint φ is true. For the traffic lights example, the partial assignment ¬r is an implicant of φ, since its cover ( ¬r ∧ g and ¬r ∧ ¬ g) only contains possible worlds. Our first result states that if we have an implicant, we can easily create possible independent distributions: Use the implicant as the deterministic part, and assign any value in [0 , 1] to the remaining factors. This is because, for implicants, the value of the other variables “does not matter” to the constraint φ.

Theorem 4.3 (Implicants determine possible independent distributions) . Let pμ be an independent distribution over worlds. Let wD be pμ’s deterministic assignment. Then pμ

is possible for φ if and only if wD is an implicant of φ.Proof. By independence of pμ, the support of pμ is the cover WwD of the deterministic assignment wD of μ, and the remaining variables can be assigned any value with some probability. Assume pμ is possible; then, for each w

in the support of pμ, w is a possible world. But then each world in the cover WwD of wD is possible, and so wD is an implicant. Next, assume wD is an implicant. Then, each world in the cover of wD is possible. But this is precisely the support of pμ. So pμ is possible. The more restrictive the constraint is over what worlds are       

> 4If the perception model pθis a neural network, μwould be the output of its last layer. We drop the reference to θas it is not relevant for our analysis.

possible, the more variables the implicants assign values to. Our example contains five implicants: ¬r ∧ g, r ∧ ¬ g, ¬r ∧¬g, ¬r, and ¬g. Therefore, the deterministic assignment of 

pμ will need to contain at least one of ¬r and ¬g for pμ to be possible. 

4.3. Conditioned independent distributions 

A common counterargument to the claim that independent distributions are biased towards determinism is that we can condition an independent distribution pμ on the constraint 

φ. This is the distribution pμ(w|φ = 1) where the variables 

wi become dependent due to conditioning on the constraint. Furthermore, such a parameterisation is an n-dimensional manifold inside the set of possible distributions, which can cover far more distributions than those characterised in The-orem 4.3. For instance, consider the independent distribu-tion p(r) = p(g) = 12 . When conditioning on φ = ¬r ∨ ¬ g,we get the uniform distribution over worlds p1 from Figure 1. In fact, we can cover the entire green triangle in Figure 1 in this way. However, this argument does not hold in a learning setting where we optimise towards a minimum of the semantic loss (Equation 1). As we already showed, the uniform distribu-tion over worlds p1 can not be represented by an indepen-dent distribution alone. In fact, there are strict conditions on when an independent distribution pμ conditioned on the constraint φ can be represented by another independent distribution qμ′ :

Theorem 4.4 (Representability of pμ(w|φ = 1) ). Let pμ

have pμ(φ = 1) > 0 and deterministic assignment wE .Then the following statements are equivalent: 1. the conditional distribution pμ(w|φ = 1) can be rep-resented by another independent distribution qμ′ ;2. there is an implicant wD that covers all possible worlds in the support of pμ;3. there is an implicant wD such that wE , φ |= wD .Proof sketch. Under this condition, we can rewrite the con-ditional distribution pμ(w|φ = 1) as an independent distri-bution where the deterministic assignment is wD , and the remaining factors are renormalised to sum to 1. This theorem is rather subtle. In our example, an indepen-dent distribution with deterministic assignment g “entails” 

¬r: Since ¬g is not true, we need to make ¬r true to be consistent with ¬r ∨ ¬ g. Since ¬r is an implicant, an in-dependent distribution can represent pμ(w|φ = 1) . Any distribution with pμ(g) = 1 will have a conditional distribu-tion at the vertex (¬r, g ), which is representable. Therefore, the distributions for which we can represent pμ(w|φ = 1) 

are those that either have pμ(g) = 1 or pμ(r) = 1 (but not both, since then pμ(φ = 1) = 0 ). For general functions, 5On the Independence Assumption in Neurosymbolic Learning 

this theorem states that a distribution can only represent a conditional independent distribution if the unconditioned distribution is deterministic in some variables. 

4.4. The geometry of sets of possible independent distributions 

While the previous section studied possible independent distributions individually, in the following section we study entire sets of possible distributions from a geometric and topological viewpoint. Our main result proves that all possi-ble independent distributions are on a face of the hypercube 

[0 , 1] n and that we can compute which faces contain possi-ble independent distributions. We next define the set of all independent distributions 

∆⊥⊥ ⊆ ∆. We calculate the probability of each world from the parameters μ ∈ [0 , 1] n. Then, we create a vector in the set of all distributions ∆:

∆⊥⊥ =

n

pμ ∈ ∆ | μ ∈ [0 , 1] n,pμi =

> n

Y

> j=1

μwi,j  

> j

· (1 − μj )1−wi,j 

o (4) We consider all parameters of possible distributions in 

[0 , 1] n. Then, we compute the probability of each world wi

using Equation 2 and the Bernoulli mass function to create a vector in ∆. This map from [0 , 1] n to ∆ is a bijection (see Lemma G.1), and so is a homeomorphism between the n-cube [0 , 1] n and ∆⊥⊥. In practice, this means we can study topological properties both in parameter space and distribution space. We will treat pμ as both a vector in ∆

and a distribution over worlds. Independent distributions can only represent a subset of the simplex ∆. We aim to understand this subset, and in particular the set of possible independent distributions 

∆⊥⊥ 

> φ

= ∆ ⊥⊥ ∩ ∆φ.4.4.1. A REPRESENTATION OF ∆⊥⊥

> φ

We next prove that the set of possible independent distri-butions ∆⊥⊥ 

> φ

is formed by considering the set of all prime implicants of φ. We find a useful representation of ∆⊥⊥

> φ

using cubical sets (often called cubical complexes ). Roth (1958) was the first to use cubical sets to develop algorithms that compute efficient representations of boolean functions, noting the relation to implicants. Intuitively, a cubical set is a union of (hyper)cubes of various dimensions. In our representation, we use implicants to create a cube. We then show a cubical set formed from such cubes is the set of possible independent distributions. The cube associated with an implicant fixes the coordinates of the deterministic variables and uses the interval [0 , 1] for the free variables. For example, the implicants of the traffic light problem form two cubes: For ¬r, the cube is {0} × 

[0 , 1] (or: the first is false, and the second is “agnostic”) and for ¬g, the cube is [0 , 1] × { 0}. We next discuss the relevant background for these concepts. 

Definition 4.5 (Elementary cubes) . An elementary interval 

I is {0}, {1}, or [0 , 1] . An (elementary) n-cube C is the Cartesian product of n elementary intervals C = I1 × · · · × 

In ⊆ [0 , 1] n. We use “cube” to refer only to elementary cubes unless mentioned otherwise. The dimension of a cube is the number of elementary intervals Ii that are [0 , 1] .Cubes of dimension 0 are called vertices and are points in 

{0, 1}n, while cubes of dimension 1 are edges that connect two vertices. A face C′ of a cube C is a cube such that 

C′ ⊆ C.

Definition 4.6 (Cubical sets) . X ⊆ [0 , 1] n is a cubical set if it is the finite union of a set of cubes {C1, ..., C k}

(Kaczynski et al., 2004). With C(X) we denote all faces of the cubes {C1, ..., C k}, while with Ck we denote the faces in C(X) of dimension k, called the k-cubes of X. A facet 

C ∈ C (X) of X is a cube that is not contained in another cube C′ ∈ C (X).Next, we need the notion of prime implicants (Quine, 1959). Informally, an implicant is a prime implicant if, by remov-ing any of its assignments, there will be extensions of the implicant that are impossible worlds. 

Definition 4.7 (Prime implicant) . An implicant wD of φ is a prime implicant if its cover WwD is not contained in the cover WwE of another implicant wE , that is, WwD̸ ⊂ W wE

for all implicants wE . With I = {wDi }mi=1 we denote the set of all prime implicants of φ.The set of prime implicants I can be found with the first step of the Quine–McCluskey algorithm (Quine, 1952; Mc-Cluskey, 1956). It creates a disjunctive normal form of φ

by considering their disjunction. Finally, we introduce the cubical set corresponding to φ.

Definition 4.8 (Implicant cubes & cubical set of φ). Each implicant wD defines an implicant cube CwD : Its i-th ele-mentary interval Ii is {wD i } if i ∈ D, and [0 , 1] otherwise. The cubical set Cφ of φ is the union of all prime implicant cubes Cφ = S  

> wD∈I

CwD .

Example 4.9. In the traffic light problem, the prime impli-cants are ¬r and ¬g. ¬r ∧ ¬ g is an implicant but is not prime, as two proper subsets are also implicants. The cubical set is Cφ = {0} × [0 , 1] ∪ [0 , 1] × { 0}.

C0(Cφ) = {(0 , 0) , (0 , 1) , (1 , 0) } is the vertices, while 

C1(Cφ) = {{ 0} × [0 , 1] , [0 , 1] × { 0}} are the edges. The first edge connects (0 , 0) and (0 , 1) , and the second con-nects (0 , 0) and (1 , 0) . This cubical set corresponds to the lines of minimal loss in the left plot of Figure 4. The implicant cube CwD contains the independent parame-6On the Independence Assumption in Neurosymbolic Learning 

ters μ for distributions pμ that deterministically return wD .We present the basic properties of Cφ in Appendix F. The most important results are that the set of cubes C(Cφ) is equal to the set of all implicant cubes. Furthermore, the 

prime implicant cubes are the facets of the cubical set Cφ.This means we can exactly compute the combinatorial struc-ture of Cφ from the prime implicants of φ.Our next result states that the cubical set Cφ indeed repre-sents the set of possible independent distributions. 

Theorem 4.10 (Representing the set of possible independent distributions) . A parameter μ is in Cφ if and only if the distribution pμ is possible for φ. That is, μ ∈ Cφ if and only if pμ ∈ ∆⊥⊥ 

> φ

. Furthermore, the cubical set Cφ cannot be represented as a union of fewer cubes. Proof sketch. A distribution pμ using a parameter μ from implicant cube CwD fixes wD and allows any value in [0 , 1] 

for the remaining factors. This describes all possible inde-pendent distributions by Theorem 4.3, so all possible inde-pendent distributions are in the union of implicant cubes. Next, we show that a parameter μ that is in the open interval 

(0 , 1) for all stochastic variables of a prime implicant cube cannot be in another (prime) implicant cube. This is because 

μ would be in the relative interior of CwD , and we know that the relative interiors of faces of a cubical set are disjoint (Kaczynski et al., 2004). This shows that no smaller set of implicants gets us to ∆⊥⊥ 

> φ

.While we can compute this representation, it can also be rather big. The number of prime implicants can be expo-nential in the number of variables, and there are formulas with Ω(3 n/n ) prime implicants (Chandra and Markowsky, 1978), above the number of worlds 2n. And as we proved, we need all prime implicants: A minimal subset of prime implicants that cover all possible worlds (for instance, the prime implicants found in the second step of the Quine– McCluskey method) does not always cover ∆⊥⊥ 

> φ

. See Ap-pendix B.1 for a counterexample. In addition, computing the combinatorial structure of the cubical set Cφ adds a significant combinatorial overhead, as it is generated from the prime implicants. 4.4.2. C ONVEXITY OF SEMANTIC LOSS OVER INDEPENDENT DISTRIBUTIONS 

Next, we study when the semantic loss restricted to inde-pendent distributions is convex. We already saw in Figure 4 that even for the simple traffic light formula, the set of possible independent distributions is not convex. We now prove this is almost always the case: 

Theorem 4.11 (Convexity) . The following statements are equivalent: 1) There is exactly one prime implicant of φ;2) Cφ is convex; 3) the semantic loss over the space of independent distributions L(μ) is convex. Proof sketch. If there is exactly one prime implicant, Cφ is an implicant cube CwD , which is clearly convex. If there is more than one prime implicant, we can construct a convex combination of two parameters that is not possible by noting that the deterministic assignment of this convex combination is not an implicant. The convexity of the semantic loss is proven using Jensen’s inequality and noting that we can marginalise out all the stochastic variables. With more than one prime implicant, we note that since its minima Cφ are non-convex, certainly the semantic loss must also be non-convex. The condition that there is a single prime implicant means that the set of all possible worlds Wφ is described by fixing some variables and letting the other variables be free. This is essentially “supervised learning” on the variables in D and absolutely no supervision for the other variables. This is an uncommon scenario for most neurosymbolic settings, as we can simply resort to standard supervised learning methods. 4.4.3. C ONNECTEDNESS OF ∆⊥⊥

> φ

We next study when the set of all possible independent distributions ∆⊥⊥ 

> φ

is connected. For this, we introduce the notion of a prime implicant graph :

Definition 4.12 (Prime implicant graph) . Let G = ( Wφ, E)

be the prime implicant graph of φ, where the vertices Wφ

is the set of possible worlds of φ and E = {(w1, w2) |∃wD ∈I : w1, w2 ∈ W wD } is the set of edges. In this graph, there is an edge between two possible worlds 

w1 and w2 when there is an implicant that covers both w1

and w2. In our traffic light example, the prime implicant graph has three vertices. There is an edge between the first and the third ( (0 , 1) and (0 , 0) ) and the second and the third ( (1 , 0) and (0 , 0) ). In the case of the XOR function (Appendix B.2) (a ∧ ¬ b) ∨ (¬a ∧ b), the graph has two vertices (1 , 0) and (0 , 1) , but no edges. 

Theorem 4.13 (Connectedness) . The connected compo-nents of the space of possible distributions Cφ correspond to the connected components in G. In particular, Cφ is a connected space if and only if G is connected. Proof sketch. The vertices of the prime implicant graph G

as points in {0, 1}n directly correspond to the vertices of 

Cφ. When an edge exists between w1 and w2, both worlds are covered by some prime implicant wD , and their deter-ministic components must include wD , so w1, w2 ∈ CwD .Since all cubes are connected, w1 and w2 are connected in 

CwD ⊆ Cφ. By induction, if there is a path in G between 

w1 and w2, there is a path in Cφ between w1 and w2.7On the Independence Assumption in Neurosymbolic Learning 

This theorem shows that the connectedness depends on the structure of the constraint. For the traffic light example, 

∆⊥⊥ 

> φ

is connected: the three possible worlds are connected through the two prime implicants ¬r and ¬g. However, ∆⊥⊥

> φ

is disconnected for the XOR function, as its prime implicant graph is disconnected. See Appendix B.2 for a visualisation. The popular MNIST Addition task (Example 2.1) is another example: Like XOR, ∆⊥⊥ 

> φ

is a set of disconnected vertices. This brings challenges to training independent perception models: Each disconnected part of the graph is a different “global optimum”, and moving from one global optimum to another will require a large change in parameters while incurring a higher loss. 

4.5. Computing the homology of ∆⊥⊥

> φ

Our representation of the set of possible independent dis-tributions is in the form of a cubical set. Cubical sets are a useful representation tool for topological spaces in algebraic topology, although simplicial complexes are more common (Hatcher, 2002; Matou ˇsek, 2008). Homology allows us to use combinatorial, algebraic objects to study the topology of cubical sets. In our case, these objects correspond to the implicants of the formula. For finite cubical sets, the problem of computing the homology is solved (Kaczynski et al., 2004). This means we can associate every formula φ

with a homology which gives all the holes in the set. This roughly tells us how “easy” this set is to traverse during optimisation: A set with many holes will require more com-plicated paths. We give an example of a formula with a hole in Appendix B.3. The algorithm behind computing the homology from a cu-bical set is complicated, and involves both (abelian) group theory and linear algebra. We refer the reader to Algorithm 3.78 in Kaczynski et al. (2004), which requires the facets of the cubical set as input. In our case, this corresponds to the set of all prime implicants, found by the Quine–McCluskey algorithm (Quine, 1952). Then we construct matrices that correspond to the boundaries of the cubes, and use linear al-gebra to compute the Smith normal form. From this matrix, the relevant groups can be constructed. 

## 5. Empirical visualisations 

To visualise what the possible distributions found by min-imising the semantic loss look like, we compare independent distributions and expressive distributions on the traffic light problem in Figure 3. We modelled independent distribu-tions with two real-valued parameters and a sigmoid, and expressive distributions with 4 real-valued parameters and a softmax. Then, we minimise the semantic loss to ensure 

p(r, g ) = 0 . We use gradient descent for 10,000 iterations with a learning rate of 0.1. r, g         

> ¬r, g r, ¬g
> ¬r, ¬g
> Independent
> p(r, g ) = 0 .7p(r, g ) = 0
> r, g
> ¬r, g r, ¬g
> ¬r, ¬g
> Softmax (expressive)
> p(r, g ) = 0 .7p(r, g ) = 0

Figure 3. The minimisation of the semantic loss on the traffic light problem for independent distributions (left) and expressive distri-butions (right). The initial distributions have impossible beliefs with p(r, g ) = 0 .7, plotted in the top-left triangle and the top trian-gle within the tetrahedron. The resulting minima with p(r, g ) = 0 

are in the bottom triangle. Minima of the independent assumption are as predicted by Theorem 4.10. The minima of the expressive parameterisation cover differing areas in the bottom triangle, but are close to the vertices. 

We find that the minima of the independent distributions are as predicted by Theorem 4.10: A union of two line segments between the vertices ¬r, g and ¬r, ¬g and the vertices r, ¬g and ¬r, ¬g. The minima of the expressive distributions are more uniformly distributed over the bottom triangle, but are biased towards the vertices. Therefore, using an expressive parameterisation is not sufficient to ensure the model is calibrated, which is a common problem in neural networks (Guo et al., 2017). In Appendix C, we also experimented with adding an entropy maximisation loss, which counteracts this bias. This is similar to how BEARS (Marconato et al., 2024) encourages diversity. 

## 6. Related work 

Many PNL systems use the independence assumption we discussed, such as semantic loss (Xu et al., 2018), Deep-ProbLog (Manhaeve et al., 2018), DeepStochLog (Winters et al., 2022), A-NeSI (van Krieken et al., 2023), NeurASP (Yang et al., 2020), and Scallop (Huang et al., 2021). As previously mentioned, this makes probabilistic reasoning tractable, as computing Equation (1) is a #P-hard problem in general. While they are not directly comparable, fuzzy methods for neurosymbolic learning also implicitly make this assumption (Serafini and Garcez, 2016; Badreddine et al., 2022; van Krieken et al., 2022). We show that several fuzzy logics also bias towards determinism in Appendix A, although more work is needed to prove that this happens with the same generality as for probabilistic methods. However, several recent methods are also compatible with more expressive distributions and show significant accuracy improvements compared to methods relying on the indepen-dence assumption. The pseudo-semantic loss (Ahmed et al., 2023) uses a pseudo-log-likelihood approximation to the 8On the Independence Assumption in Neurosymbolic Learning 

semantic loss to train autoregressive perception models. Ne-uPSL (Pryor et al., 2023) uses energy-based models that can perform joint inference over multiple variables. In semantic probabilistic layers, Ahmed et al. (2022a) experiment with an alternative parameterisation that increases expressivity without losing tractability: namely, a mixture of independent distributions (Vergari et al., 2021). We study these mixtures thoroughly in Appendix D. In particular, we prove that using two mixture components ensures the minima are connected. However, to be able to mix between an arbitrary number of possible worlds, we need at least as many components as the size of a minimal prime implicant cover. This is ex-ponential in the number of variables in general. BEARS (Marconato et al., 2024) increases expressiveness by cre-ating an ensemble of independent models, which has the same expressiveness guarantees as mixtures of independent distributions. BEARS explicitly uses this ensemble to in-crease uncertainty calibration. Cerutti et al. (2022) consider a Bayesian approach for probabilistic circuits, overcoming the independence assumption to improve the estimation of uncertainty. The study of the theory of neurosymbolic learning is still in its infancy. Marconato et al. (2023b) discuss Reasoning Shortcuts , which are perception models that minimise the semantic loss, yet learn to predict worlds that are different from the ground truth. Since the independence assump-tion biases to determinism, we hypothesise that independent distributions are more likely than expressive models to con-verge to a single reasoning shortcut: They cannot properly express uncertainty between different reasoning shortcuts. Several recent papers study how to best deal with reasoning shortcuts (Marconato et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023a). Furthermore, recent work has studied conditions for the learnability of the perception model (Wang et al., 2023b) and error bounds on its generalisation gap (Wang et al., 2023a). The output layer of the perception model also af-fects expressivity. If it is low-rank, that is, the number of neurons is lower than the number of outputs, there is an ad-ditional decrease in expressivity known as the softmax bot-tleneck (Yang et al., 2018) or the sigmoid bottleneck in the context of binary outputs (Grivas et al., 2024). Our results, in particular Theorem 4.13, are also related to the connec-tivity barrier in Monte Carlo approaches to neurosymbolic learning over independent models (Li et al., 2023b). A fu-ture study into this relation may provide insights in how to speed up Monte Carlo methods in this setting. 

## 7. Conclusion 

We studied the independence assumption in neurosymbolic learning, which characterises several popular methods. We proved that this assumption biases neurosymbolic models towards deterministic solutions. As a result, they lack the ability to express uncertainty about multiple possibly valid options. We then used tools from logic and computational homology to study the structure of the set of possible in-dependent distributions, and showed it is non-convex and disconnected in general. In future work, we want to study practical methods for expressive neurosymbolic learning that properly represent uncertainty about different valid worlds. Dropping the inde-pendence assumption means that inference becomes much more complex, so a thorough study of appropriate (approx-imate) inference methods is needed. Our theory can be extended to a thorough study of the trade-off between ex-pressivity and tractability. Our analysis of the mixture of independent distributions in Appendix D gives a stepping stone towards this goal. Another option is to consider con-straints on continuous variables. Furthermore, a thorough study of the homology discussed in Section 4.5 may re-veal further insights into the topology of the set of possible distributions. 

## Impact statement 

This paper presents foundational work to understand and advance the field of neurosymbolic machine learning. As such, there could be many potential societal consequences of applications of our work, none of which, we feel, can be easily predicted and specifically highlighted here. 

## Acknowledgements 

Emile van Krieken was funded by ELIAI (The Edin-burgh Laboratory for Integrated Artificial Intelligence), EPSRC (grant no. EP/W002876/1). Pasquale Minervini was partially funded by ELIAI (The Edinburgh Labora-tory for Integrated Artificial Intelligence), EPSRC (grant no. EP/W002876/1), an industry grant from Cisco, and a donation from Accenture LLP. Antonio Vergari was supported by the “UNREAL: Unified Reasoning Layer for Trustworthy ML” project (EP/Y023838/1) selected by the ERC and funded by UKRI EPSRC. We thank Emanuele Marconato, Andreas Grivas, Patrick Koopmann, Thiviyan Thanapalasingam, Javaloy, Nicola Branchini, Le-ander Kurscheidt, Frank van Harmelen, Annette ten Teije, Eleonora Giunchiglia, Alessandro Daniele, Samy Badred-dine, Siegfried Nijssen, Stefano Teso, and Sagar Malhotra for productive discussions and feedback while writing this work. We also thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable feedback. 

## References 

Kareem Ahmed, Stefano Teso, Kai-Wei Chang, Guy Van den Broeck, and Antonio Vergari. Semantic probabilistic 9On the Independence Assumption in Neurosymbolic Learning 

layers for neuro-symbolic learning. Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems , 35:29944–29959, 2022a. Kareem Ahmed, Eric Wang, Kai-Wei Chang, and Guy Van den Broeck. Neuro-Symbolic Entropy Regularization. In 

The 38th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelli-gence , June 2022b. Kareem Ahmed, Kai-Wei Chang, and Guy Van den Broeck. A pseudo-semantic loss for autoregressive models with logical constraints. In Thirty-Seventh Conference on Neu-ral Information Processing Systems , 2023. Samy Badreddine, Artur d’Avila Garcez, Luciano Serafini, and Michael Spranger. Logic Tensor Networks. Artificial Intelligence , 303:103649, February 2022. ISSN 0004-3702. doi: 10.1016/j.artint.2021.103649. Pietro Barbiero, Gabriele Ciravegna, Francesco Giannini, Mateo Espinosa Zarlenga, Lucie Charlotte Magister, Al-berto Tonda, Pietro Lio, Frederic Precioso, Mateja Jam-nik, and Giuseppe Marra. Interpretable Neural-Symbolic Concept Reasoning. In Proceedings of the 40th Inter-national Conference on Machine Learning , pages 1801– 1825. PMLR, July 2023. Federico Cerutti, Lance M. Kaplan, Angelika Kimmig, and Murat S¸ ensoy. Handling epistemic and aleatory un-certainties in probabilistic circuits. Machine Learning ,111(4):1259–1301, April 2022. ISSN 1573-0565. doi: 10.1007/s10994-021-06086-4. Ashok Chandra and George Markowsky. On the Number of Prime Implicants. Discrete Mathematics , 24(1):7–11, January 1978. doi: 10.1016/0012-365X(78)90168-1. Mark Chavira and Adnan Darwiche. On probabilistic in-ference by weighted model counting. Artificial Intelli-gence , 172(6):772–799, April 2008. ISSN 0004-3702. doi: 10.1016/j.artint.2007.11.002. Eleonora Giunchiglia, Mihaela Catalina Stoian, and Thomas Lukasiewicz. Deep Learning with Logical Constraints. In Luc De Raedt, editor, Proceedings of the Thirty-First International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2022, Vienna, Austria, 23-29 July 2022 , pages 5478–5485. ijcai.org, 2022. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2022/ 767. Eleonora Giunchiglia, Mihaela C ˘at ˘alina Stoian, Salman Khan, Fabio Cuzzolin, and Thomas Lukasiewicz. ROAD-R: The autonomous driving dataset with logical require-ments. Machine Learning , 112(9):3261–3291, Septem-ber 2023. ISSN 0885-6125, 1573-0565. doi: 10.1007/ s10994-023-06322-z. Andreas Grivas, Antonio Vergari, and Adam Lopez. Tam-ing the sigmoid bottleneck: Provably argmaxable sparse multi-label classification. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 38, pages 12208–12216, 2024. Chuan Guo, Geoff Pleiss, Yu Sun, and Kilian Q. Wein-berger. On calibration of modern neural networks. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh, editors, Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learn-ing , volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 1321–1330. PMLR, 06–11 Aug 2017. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/ guo17a.html .Allen Hatcher. Algebraic Topology . Cambridge University Press, 2002. Jiani Huang, Ziyang Li, Binghong Chen, Karan Samel, Mayur Naik, Le Song, and Xujie Si. Scallop: From Probabilistic Deductive Databases to Scalable Differen-tiable Reasoning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , May 2021. Tomasz Kaczynski, Konstantin Mischaikow, and Marian Mrozek. Computational Homology , volume 157 of Ap-plied Mathematical Sciences . Springer, New York, NY, 2004. ISBN 978-1-4419-2354-7 978-0-387-21597-6. doi: 10.1007/b97315. Zenan Li, Zehua Liu, Yuan Yao, Jingwei Xu, Taolue Chen, Xiaoxing Ma, and Jian L \”{u}. Learning with logi-cal constraints but without shortcut satisfaction. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Represen-tations , 2023a. URL https://openreview.net/ forum?id=M2unceRvqhh .Zenan Li, Yuan Yao, Taolue Chen, Jingwei Xu, Chun Cao, Xiaoxing Ma, and Jian L \”{u}. Softened Symbol Grounding for Neuro-symbolic Systems. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations ,February 2023b. Robin Manhaeve, Sebastijan Duman ˇci ´c, Angelika Kimmig, Thomas Demeester, and Luc De Raedt. DeepProbLog: Neural probabilistic logic programming. In Samy Bengio, Hanna M Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Kristen Grauman, Nicol `o Cesa-Bianchi, and Roman Garnett, editors, Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31: An-nual Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-tems 2018, NeurIPS 2018, 3-8 December 2018, Montr ´eal, Canada , 2018. Robin Manhaeve, Sebastijan Duman ˇci ´c, Angelika Kimmig, Thomas Demeester, and Luc De Raedt. Neural proba-bilistic logic programming in DeepProbLog. Artificial Intelligence , 298:103504, 2021. ISSN 0004-3702. doi: 10.1016/j.artint.2021.103504. 10 On the Independence Assumption in Neurosymbolic Learning 

Emanuele Marconato, Stefano Teso, and Andrea Passerini. Neuro-Symbolic Reasoning Shortcuts: Mitigation Strate-gies and their Limitations, March 2023a. Emanuele Marconato, Stefano Teso, Antonio Vergari, and Andrea Passerini. Not All Neuro-Symbolic Concepts Are Created Equal: Analysis and Mitigation of Reason-ing Shortcuts. In Thirty-Seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , May 2023b. Emanuele Marconato, Samuele Bortolotti, Emile van Krieken, Antonio Vergari, Andrea Passerini, and Stefano Teso. Bears make neuro-symbolic models aware of their reasoning shortcuts, 2024. Ji ˇr´ı Matou ˇsek. Using the Borsuk–Ulam Theorem . Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008. ISBN 978-3-540-00362-5 978-3-540-76649-0. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-76649-0. Edward J McCluskey. Minimization of boolean functions. 

The Bell System Technical Journal , 35(6):1417–1444, 1956. Connor Pryor, Charles Dickens, Eriq Augustine, Alon Al-balak, William Yang Wang, and Lise Getoor. NeuPSL: Neural Probabilistic Soft Logic. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Second International Joint Conference on Artifi-cial Intelligence , pages 4145–4153, Macau, SAR China, August 2023. International Joint Conferences on Artifi-cial Intelligence Organization. ISBN 978-1-956792-03-4. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2023/461. W. V. Quine. The Problem of Simplifying Truth Functions. 

The American Mathematical Monthly , 59(8):521–531, 1952. ISSN 0002-9890. doi: 10.2307/2308219. Willard V Quine. On cores and prime implicants of truth functions. The American Mathematical Monthly , 66(9): 755–760, 1959. J. Paul Roth. Algebraic Topological Methods for the Synthe-sis of Switching Systems. I. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society , 88(2):301–326, 1958. ISSN 0002-9947. doi: 10.2307/1993216. Luciano Serafini and Artur D.Avila Garcez. Logic tensor networks: Deep learning and logical reasoning from data and knowledge. CEUR Workshop Proceedings , 1768, 2016. ISSN 16130073. Emile van Krieken, Erman Acar, and Frank van Harmelen. Analyzing differentiable fuzzy logic operators. Artificial Intelligence , 302:103602, 2022. ISSN 0004-3702. doi: 10.1016/j.artint.2021.103602. Emile van Krieken, Thiviyan Thanapalasingam, Jakub M. Tomczak, Frank van Harmelen, and Annette ten Teije. A-NeSI: A Scalable Approximate Method for Probabilistic Neurosymbolic Inference. In Thirty-Seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems . arXiv, May 2023. Antonio Vergari, YooJung Choi, Anji Liu, Stefano Teso, and Guy Van den Broeck. A compositional atlas of tractable circuit operations for probabilistic inference. In M. Ran-zato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wort-man Vaughan, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 34, pages 13189–13201. Cur-ran Associates, Inc., 2021. Kaifu Wang, Hangfeng He, Tin D. Nguyen, Piyush Kumar, and Dan Roth. On regularization and inference with la-bel constraints. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett, editors, International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2023, 23-29 July 2023, Hon-olulu, Hawaii, USA , volume 202 of Proceedings of Ma-chine Learning Research , pages 35740–35762. PMLR, 2023a. Kaifu Wang, Efi Tsamoura, and Dan Roth. On Learning Latent Models with Multi-Instance Weak Supervision. In 

Thirty-Seventh Conference on Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , June 2023b. Thomas Winters, Giuseppe Marra, Robin Manhaeve, and Luc De Raedt. Deepstochlog: Neural stochastic logic programming. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 36, pages 10090–10100, 2022. Jingyi Xu, Zilu Zhang, Tal Friedman, Yitao Liang, and Guy den Broeck. A semantic loss function for deep learning with symbolic knowledge. In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause, editors, Proceedings of the 35th Inter-national Conference on Machine Learning , volume 80, pages 5502–5511, Stockholmsm ¨assan, Stockholm Swe-den, 2018. PMLR. Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and William W. Cohen. Breaking the softmax bottleneck: A high-rank RNN language model. In International Confer-ence on Learning Representations , 2018. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=HkwZSG-CZ .Zhun Yang, Adam Ishay, and Joohyung Lee. NeurASP: Embracing neural networks into answer set programming. In Christian Bessiere, editor, Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intel-ligence, IJCAI-20 , pages 1755–1762. International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization, July 2020. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2020/243. G ¨unter M. Ziegler. Lectures on polytopes . Springer-Verlag, New York, 1995. 11 On the Independence Assumption in Neurosymbolic Learning 

Symbol Description Reference 

w A world in {0, 1}n Sec. 2 

x An high-dimensional input Sec. 2 

θ Parameter of the perception model Sec. 2 

φ A constraint of {0, 1}n → { 0, 1} Sec. 2 

pθ (w|x) The perception model Sec. 2 

L(θ) The semantic loss Sec. 2 

W The set of all worlds {0, 1}n Sec. 3 

Wφ The set of possible worlds Sec. 3 

∆ The set of all distributions over worlds Sec. 4.1 

∆φ The set of possible distributions Sec. 4.1 

∆⊥⊥ The set of independent distributions Sec. 4.4 

∆⊥⊥ 

> φ

The set of possible independent distributions Sec. 4.4 

μ A parameter for an independent distribution in [0 , 1] n Sec. 4.2 

pμ(w) An independent distribution parameterised by μ Sec. 4.2 

wD A partial assignment to the variables in D. Usually an implicant Def. 4.1 and 4.2 

WwD The cover of a partial assignment (all worlds that extend it) Def. 4.2 

I The set of all prime implicants Def. 4.7 

C An (elementary) cube Def. 4.5 

C(X) The set of all cubes in a cubical set X Def. 4.6 

CwD The cube corresponding to an implicant Def. 4.8 

Cφ The cubical set of parameters in [0 , 1] n that satisfy the knowledge φ Def. 4.8 

G The prime implicant graph Def. 4.12                

> Table 1. Table of notation used in the paper . We use bold symbols x,wto denote vectors, both real and boolean. We use pand q,possibly parameterised, to refer to distributions over w∈ { 0,1}n.Since these correspond to vertices in ∆(the simplex over all possible worlds), we will treat pas both a vector and a distribution.

12 On the Independence Assumption in Neurosymbolic Learning 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0          

> p(r)
> 0.00.20.40.60.81.0
> p(g)
> Product t-conorm
> 0.00.20.40.60.81.0
> p(r)
> 0.00.20.40.60.81.0
> p(g)
> G¨ odel t-conorm
> 0.00.20.40.60.81.0
> p(r)
> 0.00.20.40.60.81.0
> p(g)
> Lukasiewicz t-conorm

Figure 4. Plots of neurosymbolic loss functions for the formula 

¬r ∨ ¬ g using several t-norms. Left: Product t-norm, computed as 

− log pθ (φ|x). This coincides with the semantic loss. Center: The G ¨odel t-conorm 1 − max(1 − r, 1 − g). Right: The Ł ukasiewicz t-conorm 1 − min(1 , 2 − r − g).

## A. Bias towards determinism for Fuzzy Logic 

Fuzzy Neurosymbolic Learning. While our paper focuses on probabilistic methods, we shortly introduce relevant background about fuzzy neurosymbolic learning (FNL). Roughly, FNL methods construct a fuzzy evaluation func-tion eφ : [0 , 1] n → [0 , 1] . eφ maps independent probability distributions to fuzzy truth values in [0 , 1] by relaxing the logical connectives to operators on [0 , 1] (Badreddine et al., 2022). If the distribution is deterministic, then the fuzzy truth becomes binary truth. For a discussion on fuzzy relax-ations, see (van Krieken et al., 2022). We limit our discus-sion to the three common fuzzy disjunctions (t-conorms): Product: a ∨ b = a + b − a · b, 

G¨ odel: a ∨ b = max( a, b ),

Łukasiewicz: a ∨ b = min(1 , a + b)

We plot the truth values of three common t-conorms for this formula in Figure 4 as a function of p(r) and p(g). The product t-conorms and G ¨odel t-conorms have their minima at the lines p(r) = 0 and p(g) = 0 , and have a similar biasing effect as the semantic loss. The Łukasiewicz t-conorm is minimised when p(r)+ p(g) ≤

0.5 and does not bias towards a deterministic choice. This may explain why Ł ukasiewicz t-conorms are often more ef-fective in realistic settings (Giunchiglia et al., 2023). How-ever, the Łukasiewicz logic has other problems, such as vanishing gradients (van Krieken et al., 2022) and the fact they do not converge to solutions where p(φ = 1) = 1 .

## B. Additional examples 

In this appendix, we plot several example formulas that illustrate the theory discussed in the paper. a, ¬b, c 

## ¬a, b, ¬c a, b, c a, b, ¬c

## Pb∧¬ c Pa∧b

## Pa∧c

Figure 5. The full 3-simplex over possible worlds and the set of possible independent distributions in blue for the formula discussed in Section B.1. The Pϕ labels denote the set of distributions characterised by the implicant ϕ, as defined in Proposition 4.10. 

B.1. Minimal covers of prime implicants do not cover all possible independent distributions 

In Proposition 4.10, we showed that the set of all prime implicants is necessary to cover all possible independent distributions. In this appendix, we give a counterexample to the idea that a minimal cover of prime implicants might be sufficient to cover all possible independent distributions. Such minimal covers are computed in the second step of the Quine–McCluskey algorithm (Quine, 1952; McCluskey, 1956) to minimise the description length of the boolean formula. 

Definition B.1. A set of prime implicants I is a cover of φ

if S  

> wD∈I

WwD = Wφ, that is, the union of their cover is equal to the set of all possible worlds. A cover is minimal if no smaller set of prime implicants is also a cover. Consider a boolean formula on three variables with possible worlds {(a, b, c ), (a, b, ¬c), (¬a, b, ¬c), (a, ¬b, c )}. We vi-sualize the full simplex over possible worlds and the set of possible independent distributions in Figure 5. The prime implicants of this formula are {b ∧ ¬ c, a ∧ c, a ∧ b, }. The minimal cover of prime implicants is {b ∧ ¬ c, a ∧ c}: The worlds a ∧ b covers are a ∧ b ∧ c, which is also covered by prime implicant a ∧ c, and a, b, ¬c, which is also covered by prime implicant b ∧ ¬ c. However, by Theorem 4.3, the distribution that deterministically assigns a ∧ b, but gives 0.5 probability to c, can be represented only using the prime implicant a ∧ b: The other two prime implicants cannot represent distributions where c is stochastic. Therefore, min-imal covers of prime implicants do not cover all possible independent distributions. 

B.2. The XOR formula has disconnected minima 

In Figure 6, we plot the semantic loss under the indepen-dence assumption for the XOR formula φ = ( a ∧ ¬ b) ∨

(¬a ∧ b). Note that the minima of this function are in 

(1 , 0) and (0 , 1) , since the prime implicants are a ∧ ¬ b and 13 On the Independence Assumption in Neurosymbolic Learning 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

# p(a)

> 0.00.20.40.60.81.0
> p(b)

# Semantic loss        

> Figure 6. The loss landscape of the semantic loss under the inde-pendence assumption for the XOR formula φ= ( a∧ ¬ b)∨(¬a∧
> b).

μa

μc μb

Ca∧b

Cb∧c

0, 0, 0

Ca∧¬ c

1, 1, 1

C¬a∧c

C¬b∧¬ c

C¬a∧¬ b                      

> Figure 7. An example of a formula where the set of possible inde-pendent distributions has a hole. The formula is φ= ( ¬a∧ ¬ b)∨
> (¬a∧c)∨(b∧c)∨(a∧b)∨(a∧ ¬ c)∨(¬b∧ ¬ c). The blue lines correspond to the set of possible independent distributions.
> Cϕis an implicant cube.

¬a ∧ b. These are clearly disconnected minima, and to move from one minimum to the other, we would have to traverse through the saddle point at (0 .5, 0.5) , meanwhile incurring a significantly high loss. 

B.3. The set of possible independent distributions can have holes 

In Figure 7 we show that there are formulas for which the set of possible independent distributions ∆⊥⊥ 

> φ

has holes. Here, the formula φ = ( ¬a ∧ ¬ b) ∨ (¬a ∧ c) ∨ (b ∧ c) ∨ (a ∧

b) ∨ (a ∧ ¬ c) ∨ (¬b ∧ ¬ c) is defined by a disjunction of prime implicants. We choose the prime implicants carefully so that each face of the cube has exactly 2 edges. The set highlighted in blue cannot be shrunk to a single point: It is a hole in space. This hole will be detected by algorithms that compute the homology of ∆⊥⊥ 

> φ

(see Section 4.5). How relevant is this to optimisation? The presence of holes means there is a cycle between different points, meaning we can move from one point to another in multiple ways. In our example, if one were to remove one of the prime implicants from the formula, there is only one path through ∆⊥⊥ 

> φ

.

## C. Entropy regularisation helps to calibrate expressive models 

We repeat the experiments in Section 5 for both the inde-pendent and the softmax model with entropy regularisation. We note that we maximise entropy, instead of minimising the entropy, like in Neuro-Symbolic Entropy Regularisation (Ahmed et al., 2022b). In particular, we use the loss function 

Lα(θ) = (1 − α)L(θ) − αH (pθ |φ), (5) where we compute H(pθ |φ) = 13 (pθ (¬r, g ) + pθ (r, ¬g) + 

pθ (¬r, ¬g)) .We plot the results in Figure 8 for the independent model and various values of α. We see that the entropy regularisation does not help to calibrate the model. Rather, it biases the model more towards the ¬r, ¬g vertex. For larger values of α, the minimum of the augmented loss no longer is a minimum of the semantic loss. In fact, for α = 0 .1, all initial points converge to a minimum that floats just above the bottom triangle. It assigns a probability of 0.023 to the impossible world r, g .The intuition for this is that the entropy regularisation is min-imised only at the uniform belief p1 from Figure 1, which is not representable by independent distributions. Then, by minimising the augmented loss Lα, it trades off the closest point to p1 and staying close to the bottom triangle. For expressive distributions, the effect of entropy regularisa-tion is quite different, which we plot in Figure 9. Again, the parameter α trades off the original minima, which are close to the vertices in the bottom triangle, to the uniform distribu-tion p1. For α = 0 .1, the minima are indeed all close to p1.However, for appropriate values of α such as α = 0 .01 , the minima almost distribute perfectly over the bottom triangle, and it almost finds the conditioned version of the original distribution. We note that finding the parameter α to get this behaviour would be extremely challenging in practice. 

## D. The mixture of independent distributions 

In this appendix, we study the mixture of independent dis-tributions with k components. The main results here are that for k ≥ 2, the space of possible distributions is con-nected. Furthermore, we provide bounds on the number of components needed to completely fill the space of all possible distributions ∆φ. A lower bound is the number of disconnected components in the prime implicant graph, and an upper bound is the number of prime implicants. This lower bound can be tricky: For example, the number of 14 On the Independence Assumption in Neurosymbolic Learning r, g 

¬r, g r, ¬g

¬r, ¬g

independent, α = 0 .0

p(r, g ) = 0 .7p(r, g ) = 0 

r, g 

¬r, g r, ¬g

¬r, ¬g

independent, α = 0 .005 

p(r, g ) = 0 .7p(r, g ) = 0 

r, g 

¬r, g r, ¬g

¬r, ¬g

independent, α = 0 .01 

p(r, g ) = 0 .7p(r, g ) ≤ 0.003 

r, g 

¬r, g r, ¬g

¬r, ¬g

independent, α = 0 .02 

p(r, g ) = 0 .7p(r, g ) ≤ 0.006 

r, g 

¬r, g r, ¬g

¬r, ¬g

independent, α = 0 .05 

p(r, g ) = 0 .7p(r, g ) ≤ 0.013 

r, g 

¬r, g r, ¬g

¬r, ¬g

independent, α = 0 .1

p(r, g ) = 0 .7p(r, g ) ≤ 0.023 

Figure 8. Minimising the semantic loss with entropy regularisation for the independent model. r, g 

¬r, g r, ¬g

¬r, ¬g

Softmax, α = 0 .0

p(r, g ) = 0 .7 p(r, g ) = 0 

r, g 

¬r, g r, ¬g

¬r, ¬g

Softmax, α = 0 .005 

p(r, g ) = 0 .7 p(r, g ) = 0 

r, g 

¬r, g r, ¬g

¬r, ¬g

Softmax, α = 0 .01 

p(r, g ) = 0 .7 p(r, g ) = 0 

r, g 

¬r, g r, ¬g

¬r, ¬g

Softmax, α = 0 .02 

p(r, g ) = 0 .7 p(r, g ) = 0 

r, g 

¬r, g r, ¬g

¬r, ¬g

Softmax, α = 0 .05 

p(r, g ) = 0 .7 p(r, g ) = 0 

r, g 

¬r, g r, ¬g

¬r, ¬g

Softmax, α = 0 .1

p(r, g ) = 0 .7 p(r, g ) = 0 

Figure 9. Minimising the semantic loss with entropy regularisation for the joint model. 

15 On the Independence Assumption in Neurosymbolic Learning 

disconnected components in the MNIST Addition task is exponential in the number of digits. The parameter space of this distribution is the Cartesian product Θk = ∆ k × [0 , 1] k·n, where ∆k is the k + 1 -dimensional simplex. We map this parameter space to the space of distributions over worlds ∆ with the map 

fk·⊥ ⊥ : Θ k → ∆, which we define as: 

fk·⊥ ⊥(α, μ1, ..., μk)i =

> k

X

> m=1

αmf⊥⊥(μm)i (6) where f⊥⊥ is defined as in Equation 7. Unlike f⊥⊥, this is not a bijection, as multiple parameterisations can map to the same distributions. We will refer to pθ = fk·⊥ ⊥(θ) as a vector in ∆.

Lemma D.1. Consider a parameter θ ∈ Θk of a mixture of k independent components. Then fk·⊥ ⊥(θ) is a possible distribution if and only if all components i such that αi > 0

have a deterministic assignment that is an implicant. Proof. The mixture of independents assigns some mass to all independent distributions with αi > 0. For such an independent distribution to be possible, by Proposition 4.3, the deterministic assignment of this component has to be an implicant. Conversely, assume there is a component with 

αi > 0 that is not a possible distribution. Then, it assigns some mass to an impossible world, and so must the mixture of components. Therefore, the mixture is not a possible distribution. Let us now discuss the set of possible distributions for the mixture distribution Pk,φ = fk·⊥ ⊥(Θ k) ∩ ∆φ. Conveniently, if k ≥ 2, the set of minima of the semantic loss under the mixture distribution is connected: 

Proposition D.2. The set of possible mixture distributions 

Pk,φ is connected for k ≥ 2.Proof. Since ∆⊥⊥ 

> φ

⊆ P k,φ , any two points that are con-nected in ∆⊥⊥ 

> φ

are also connected in ∆⊥⊥

> φ k

.Consider two points μ1, μ2 ∈ ∆⊥⊥ 

> φ

that are not connected. Then we can create a convex combination between pμ1 and 

pμ2 in Pk,φ by moving α1 from 1 to 0 and α2 from 0 to 1. This convex combination is a possible distribution in Pk,φ 

by Lemma D.1. Consider two parameters θ1, θ2 ∈ Θk. We will construct a path from pθ1 to pθ2 through Pk,φ . First, choose a com-ponent i ∈ { 1, ..., k } such that α1,i > 0. Next, contin-uously map the convex mixture parameter from α1 to ei

(the i-th standard normal vector). Call the resulting param-eter ˆθ1. Since we do not change the mixture components themselves, we never leave Pk,φ by Lemma D.1. Then, 

pˆθ1 = f∆⊥⊥ (μ1,i ) = pμ1,i is a possible independent distri-bution. Consider some component j ∈ { 1, ..., k } such that 

α2, j > 0. As argued in the paragraphs above, there is a path between pμ1,i and pμ2,j in Pk,φ . Consider ˆθ2 to be θ2

but replacing α with ej such that pˆθ2 = pμ2,j . Then, we continuously map ej to α2,j to finally arrive at θ2.Clearly, increasing the number of components is beneficial to further covering the complete set of all possible distri-butions ∆φ. But how parameter-efficient is the use of mix-tures of independent distributions to cover this set? First, we prove a straightforward lemma. 

Lemma D.3. Consider a parameter θ ∈ Θk of a mixture of k independent components such that pθ ∈ P k,φ . Then 

pθ i > 0 if and only if there is a component m ∈ { 1, ..., k }

such that αm > 0 and the deterministic assignment of μm

covers w.Proof. Let pθ i > 0. Then by Equation 6 there must be a 

m ∈ { 0, ..., k } with αm > 0 such that f⊥⊥(μm)i > 0. But then, by Proposition 4.3, the deterministic assignment of 

μm covers w.Similarly, let the deterministic assignment of μm cover w

and let αm > 0. Then by Proposition 4.3, f⊥⊥(μm)i > 0.But then by Equation 6, pθ i > 0.We next prove a significant lower bound: 

Theorem D.4. The minimal number of mixture components needed to assign some probability to all possible worlds is the number of prime implicants in a minimal cover of prime implicants I.Proof. First, we prove that if a mixture distribution can assign some probability to all possible worlds, then it has at least |I| components. Assume otherwise. Then |I| − 

1 components are enough to cover ∆φ. Consider some distribution p ∈ ∆φ such that pi > 0 for all possible worlds 

wi. Let θ ∈ Θ|I|− 1 be parameters such that pθ = p, which have to exist by assumption. Let I′ be the implicants formed from the independent pa-rameters μi, i ∈ { 1, ..., I − 1}. By Lemma D.3, the set of worlds such that pθ (w) > 0 is W′ = T  

> wD∈I ′

WwD . This set must equal Wφ by the assumption that pi > 0 for all possible worlds. But this is a contradiction, since this would make the set of implicants I′ a cover of φ with |I| − 1 com-ponents, which is smaller than the minimal cover of prime implicants I.Next, we prove that if the number of components is at least 

|I| , then we can assign some probability to all possible worlds. Define an order wD 1, ..., wD |I| of a minimal cover of prime implicants. Let μ1, ..., μ|I| be independent pa-rameters such that μi is in the relative interior of CwD i

16 On the Independence Assumption in Neurosymbolic Learning 

(see Theorem 4.10 and its proof for a rigorous definition). Use μ1, ..., μ|I| together with α such that αi > 0 for all 

i ∈ { 0, ..., |I|} to define parameters θ ∈ Θ|I| . Then, by Lemma D.3, pθ assigns some probability to all possible worlds. Interestingly, here a minimal cover of prime implicants is relevant, while for Theorem 4.10, we needed to consider the set of all prime implicants (see also Appendix B.1). Figure 5 provides some intuition: b ∧ ¬ c and a ∧ c form a minimal set of prime implicants. By mixing between points on the line segments Pb∧¬ c and Pa∧c, we can, in fact, cover the entire set of possible worlds. Clearly, |I| is also a lower bound on the number of compo-nents needed to completely cover φ. A simple upper bound for the number of components needed to mix is |W φ|, since we can put a (deterministic) independent distribution on each of the possible worlds and mix them via α. Another lower bound is ⌈|W φ|/(n + 1) ⌉, since fk, ⊥⊥(Θ k) is at most a k · (n + 1) -dimensional subspace of ∆.Given Theorem D.4 and the other bounds, is using a mixture of independents a parameter-efficient way to allow percep-tion models to express more uncertainty? We would argue not, at least not in general. For example, the size of the minimal cover for MNIST Addition grows exponentially with the number of digits considered, in fact, it is equal to the number of possible worlds. But then we are using 

|W φ| · (n + 1) parameters, which are n times more parame-ters than necessary: The space of possible distributions is a 

|W φ|-dimensional subspace of ∆.

## E. Convexity of semantic loss 

In this Appendix, we show that the semantic loss is a convex loss over the space of all possible distributions ∆ using Jensen’s inequality and the fact that the WMC in Equation 1 is linear. Note that this does not mean it is convex with respect to the parameters θ of the perception model. Let 

p1, p 2 ∈ ∆. Note that since ∆ is a convex set, λp 1 + (1 −

λ)p2 ∈ ∆. Then, 

L(λp 1 + (1 − λ)p2)= − log 

 X

> w∈W φ

λp 1(w) + (1 − λ)p2(w)



= − log 



λ X

> w∈W φ

p1(w) + (1 − λ) X

> w∈W φ

p2(w)



≤ − λ log X

> w∈W φ

p1(w) − (1 − λ) log X

> w∈W φ

p2(w)=λL(p1) + (1 − λ)L(p2)

## F. Cubical sets generated by prime implicants 

To help understand our results geometrically and prove some of the main theorems in Appendix G, we study the basic properties of the cubical set Cφ. For background on poly-topes, faces, face posets, and polyhedral complexes, see Ziegler (1995), and for an introduction and basic properties of cubical sets, see Kaczynski et al. (2004). First, we define elementary cells, which allow us to access the relative interior of a cube by changing intervals from a closed set to an open set. 

Definition F.1. Associated with each cube C = I1 ×... ×In

is an (elementary) cell ◦

C = ◦

I1 × ... × ◦

In ⊆ C, where each 

> ◦

Ii = Ii for the degenerate intervals [0 , 0] and [1 , 1] , and 

> ◦

Ii = (0 , 1) for the nondegenerate interval [0 , 1] .The following proposition allows us to associate implicants to faces of Cφ.

Proposition F.2. The faces C(Cφ) of Cφ is the set of impli-cant cubes. Proof. Consider some face X ∈ C (Cφ). Since by definition a face is an (elementary) cube, it can be represented by 

I1 × ... × In, where each Ii is an elementary interval. Use the degenerate intervals to create a partial assignment wD .If wD was not an implicant, then by Theorem 4.3, any 

μ ∈ ◦

CwD is not possible, which contradicts Theorem 4.10. Therefore, X is an implicant cube. Next, consider some implicant wD . By definition, there is a prime implicant wE ⊆ wD that assigns to a subset of wD .Therefore, the only difference between the implicant cubes of wD and wE is that the latter has fewer nondegenerate intervals. Therefore, CwD ⊆ CwE , and so CwD is a face of 

CwE . Therefore, CwD is a face of Cφ.

Proposition F.3. The facets of Cφ are the prime implicant cubes CwD .Proof. Consider some facet X of Cφ. By Proposition F.2, the deterministic part of X is an implicant wD . Assume 

wD is not a prime implicant. Then there is a deterministic variable i that we can remove from wD and still have an implicant wE . But then CwE ⊃ C, with C = being a face of CwE , which is in contradiction with the assumption that 

C is a facet. 

Proposition F.4. The vertices C0(Cφ) of Cφ is equal to the set of possible worlds Wφ.Proof. Let C0(Cφ) ⊆ { 0, 1}n be the vertices of Cφ, which by Proposition F.2 is the implicant cubes with no stochastic variables, that is, it assigns a value to every variable and 17 On the Independence Assumption in Neurosymbolic Learning 

corresponds directly to a world. By the fact that it is an implicant, this world has to be possible, that is, C0(Cφ) = 

|W φ|.

Proposition F.5. The vertices C0(CwD ) of (prime) impli-cant cube CwD is equal to the cover of wD .Proof. Considering wD as the constraint that a world w

has to agree on the deterministic variables with wD , by Proposition F.4, the vertices of CwD are precisely such worlds. This is the cover of wD .

## G. Proofs of the main theorems 

In this appendix, we give the proofs for the theorems in the main paper. Understanding some of these proofs requires understanding the connection of our problem to cubical sets, which we give in Appendix F. We recommend going through Appendix F before reading the proofs. We start off by defining the transformation from independent parameters to distributions and prove that it is a bijection. First, let 

f⊥⊥(μ)i =

> n

Y

> j=1

μwi,j  

> j

· (1 − μj )1−wi,j . (7) be a function f⊥⊥ : [0 , 1] n → ∆⊥⊥ that maps the parameters 

μ to the set of independent distributions. Note that this is the transformation used in Equation 4. 

Lemma G.1. The map f⊥⊥ is a continuous bijection from 

[0 , 1] n to ∆⊥⊥5.Proof. Define the function f −1 

> ⊥⊥

: ∆ ⊥⊥ → [0 , 1] n as 

f −1 

> ⊥⊥

(p)i = p(wi = 1) = 

> |W|

X

> j=1

wj,i pj i ∈ 1, ..., n. (8) Consider μ ∈ [0 , 1] n. Since μ are the parameters of an independent distribution, the marginal probability pμ(wi =1) = μi. This is also by definition the sum of the probabili-ties of all worlds wk with wk,i = 1 , that is, f −1 

> ⊥⊥

. Therefore, 

f −1 

> ⊥⊥

(f⊥⊥(μ)) i = μi.Next, consider p ∈ ∆⊥⊥. By the definition of ∆⊥⊥ in Equation 4, there must be a parameter μ ∈ [0 , 1] n such that f (μ) = p, that is, p represents an independent dis-tribution by definition. Therefore, the marginal proba-bilities computed with f −1 

> ⊥⊥

precisely describe p, and so 

f⊥⊥(f −1 

> ⊥⊥

(p)) = p.Next, we repeat the theorems from the main body of the text and give their proofs.   

> 5It is a bijection to ∆⊥⊥, but not to the codomain ∆.

Theorem 4.4 (Representability of pμ(w|φ = 1) ). Let pμ

have pμ(φ = 1) > 0 and deterministic assignment wE .Then the following statements are equivalent: 1. the conditional distribution pμ(w|φ = 1) can be rep-resented by another independent distribution qμ′ ;2. there is an implicant wD that covers all possible worlds in the support of pμ;3. there is an implicant wD such that wE , φ |= wD .Proof. 2 → 1: Assume such an implicant wD of φ exists. Then we rewrite the conditional distribution pμ(w|φ = 1) 

as 

pμ(w|φ = 1) = 

Qni=1 μiφ(w)

pμ(φ = 1) (9) 

= I[w ∈ W wD ]

Q  

> i̸∈D

μi

pμ(φ = 1) (10) 

= I[w ∈ W wD ] Y

> i̸∈D

μipμ(φ = 1) n−| D|.

(11) Here, I[w ∈ W wD ] is the indicator function that is 1 when 

w is in the cover of wD . This is an independent distribution 

qμ′ with deterministic assignment wD and parameters μ′ 

> i

=

μipμ(φ = 1) n−| D| for the stochastic variables. In the first step, we used that φ(w) = 0 exactly when wD differs from the implicant wD .

1 → 2: Assume there is no implicant wD as described in 2. Then, the deterministic assignment of the conditional distribution pμ(w|φ = 1) is not an implicant, as if it was, we could have constructed such an implicant. But then, by Theorem 4.3, there must be a world w in the cover of the deterministic assignment of q that is not possible. Since for independent distributions, any worlds in the cover of the deterministic assignment get positive probability, such an in-dependent distribution must also assign positive probability to this extension, yet pμ(w|φ = 1) = 0 , so pμ(w|φ = 1) 

cannot be represented by an independent distribution. 

2 → 3: Assume all possible worlds in the support of pμ are in the cover of the implicant wD . That means all worlds in the cover of wE for which the constraint φ holds are also in the cover of wD . Therefore, wE , φ |= wD .

3 → 2: Assume there is an implicant wD such that 

wE , φ |= wD . By independence, the support of p con-tains the worlds extending wE . By the entailment, its subset of possible worlds is those that also extend wD .

Theorem 4.10 (Representing the set of possible independent distributions) . A parameter μ is in Cφ if and only if the distribution pμ is possible for φ. That is, μ ∈ Cφ if and only if pμ ∈ ∆⊥⊥ 

> φ

. Furthermore, the cubical set Cφ cannot be represented as a union of fewer cubes. 

18 On the Independence Assumption in Neurosymbolic Learning 

Proof. Consider some pμ ∈ ∆⊥⊥ 

> φ

. Then, by Theorem 4.3, the deterministic part wE of μ is an implicant of φ. Let 

wD ∈ I be any prime implicant that wE is an extension of, which has to exist by construction. Clearly CwE ⊆ CwD ,and so μ ∈ CwD ⊆ Cφ. Next, assume μ ∈ Cφ for some 

wD ∈ I . wD is an implicant of φ, and so by Theorem 4.3, 

pμ is possible for φ, hence pμ ∈ ∆⊥⊥ 

> φ

.Next, we prove that there is no smaller set of cubes than the set of prime implicant cubes that generate Cφ. Associated with each implicant cube CwD , is an (elementary) impli-cant cell ◦

CwD ⊆ CwD . ◦

CwD is similarly defined as CwD ,except it uses open intervals (0 , 1) instead of closed inter-vals [0 , 1] . Let wD be a prime implicant and let μ ∈ ◦

CwD .All cubes are equal to the union of cells inside it (Kaczyn-ski et al. (2004), Proposition 2.15(v)). Since the different cells in a cubical complex are disjoint (Kaczynski et al. (2004), Proposition 2.15(iii)), μ is not in another implicant cube. 

Theorem 4.11 (Convexity) . The following statements are equivalent: 1) There is exactly one prime implicant of φ;2) Cφ is convex; 3) the semantic loss over the space of independent distributions L(μ) is convex. Proof. 1 ↔ 2 follows directly from Kaczynski et al. (2004), Proposition 2.80, by noting that the only rectangles in our setting are the elementary cubes in [0 , 1] . Since there is no proof of Proposition 2.80 given in Kaczynski et al. (2004), we provide it for completeness’ sake. 

2 → 1: Assume there is exactly one prime implicant wD

of φ. Then Cφ is described by CwD . This is an elementary cube, which is convex. 

1 → 2: Next, assume there is more than one prime impli-cant. Consider two distinct prime implicants wD , wE ∈ I .Consider μwD ∈ CwD \ CwE and μwE ∈ CwE \ CwD ,which have to exist by Proposition 4.10. Consider μ to be any non-trivial convex combination of μwD and μwE . Note that the deterministic assignment of μ is ˆD = {k ∈ D ∩ E :

wD k = wE k }. Since the prime implicants are different, at least one of the following needs to hold: 1. There is a k ∈ D but k̸ ∈ E. Then μk is stochastic, and ˆD is a strict subset of D.2. There is a k ∈ D ∩ E such that wD k ̸ = wE k . By the convex combination, μk is stochastic, as it assigns probability mass to both wD k and wE k . Therefore, ˆD

is a strict subset of D.Since D is a prime implicant, removing any element from 

D results in a deterministic assignment that is no longer an implicant. Thus, by Theorem 4.3, pμ is not possible. 

2 → 3: Assume there is exactly one prime implicant wD .Then note that the only possible worlds are the cover WwD .The cover contains all assignments to the stochastic vari-ables, i.e., the variables not in D. This means we can safely marginalize those out: 

pμ(φ = 1) = X

> w∈W wD

pμ(w)= X

> w∈W wD

Y

> i∈D

pμ(wD i ) Y

> i∈{ 1,...,n }\ D

pμ(wi)= Y

> i∈D

pμ(wD i ) X

> w∈W wD

Y

> i∈{ 1,...,n }\ D

pμ(wi)= Y

> i∈D

pμ(wD i ) X

> w∈W wD

pμ(w{1,...,n }\ D )= Y

> i∈D

pμ(wD i ) = pμ(wD ).

Given λ ∈ (0 , 1) , μ1, μ2 ∈ [0 , 1] n, we define μλ =

λμ1 + (1 − λ)μ2 for brevity. Rewriting, and using Jensen’s inequality and some slightly laborious algebra, we find that 

L(μλ) = − log pμλ (φ = 1) = − log pμλ (wD )= − log Y

> i∈D

pμλ (wD i )= − X

> i∈D

log( μλwD i  

> i

(1 − μλi )1−wD i )= − X

> i∈D

wD i log μλi + (1 − wD i ) log(1 − μλi )= − X

> i∈D

wD i log( λμ 1i + (1 − λ)μ2i)+ (1 − wD i ) log(1 − (λμ 1i + (1 − λ)μ2i)) = − X

> i∈D

wD i log( λμ 1i + (1 − λ)μ2i)+ (1 − wD i ) log( λ(1 − μ1i) + (1 − λ)(1 − μ2i)) 

≤ − X

> i∈D

wD i (λ log μ1i + (1 − λ) log μ2i)+ (1 − wD i )( λ log(1 − μ1i) + (1 − λ) log(1 − μ2i)) = − X

> i∈D

λ log μ1wD i  

> i

(1 − μ1i)1−wD i 

+ (1 − λ) log μ2wD i  

> i

(1 − μ2i)1−wD i 

= − λ log pμ1 (φ = 1) − (1 − λ) log pμ2 (φ)=λL(μ1) + (1 − λ)L(μ2).

3 → 2. Assume there is more than one prime impli-cant. Using 1 → 2, this means Cφ is non-convex. There-fore, there is a pair μ1, μ2 ∈ Cφ and λ ∈ (0 , 1) such that μλ = λμ1 + (1 − λ)μ2̸ ∈ Cφ. By Theorem 4.10, (μ1) = L(μ2) = 0 < L(μλ), as Cφ exactly de-scribes the possible distributions where L(μ) = 0 . There-fore, L(μλ) > λ L(μ1) + (1 − λ)L(μ2), proving non-convexity. 19 On the Independence Assumption in Neurosymbolic Learning 

Theorem 4.13 (Connectedness) . The connected compo-nents of the space of possible distributions Cφ correspond to the connected components in G. In particular, Cφ is a connected space if and only if G is connected. Proof. By Proposition F.4, the vertices of Cφ are precisely the possible worlds Wφ. We say w1, ..., wn ∈ W φ are 

edge-connected if there exist edges E1, ..., E n ∈ C 1(Cφ)

such that wi and wi+1 are faces of Ei.Consider an edge (w1, w2) ∈ E . Then there is a prime implicant wD that covers both w1 and w2. Therefore, w1

and w2 are both in CwD . Since CwD is an (elementary) cube, by Kaczynski et al. (2004), Proposition 2.51.1, w1

and w2 are edge-connected. Let E ∈ C 1(Cφ) be an edge with vertices w1 and w2. E

is a face of a prime implicant cube CwD by Definition 4.6, and by Proposition F.5, w1 and w2 are both in the cover 

WwD . Therefore, (w1, w2) ∈ E .Combining these two results, we find that w1 and w2 are edge-connected if and only if there is an edge between them in G. Therefore, by Theorem 2.55 and Corollary 2.57 of Kaczynski et al. (2004), the connected components of G and 

Cφ coincide. 20