Title: How Transformers Learn Structured Data: Insights From Hierarchical Filtering

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=AVXApuBCvN

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# How Transformers Learn Structured Data: Insights From Hierarchical Filtering 

J´ erˆ ome Garnier-Brun 1 2 Marc M´ ezard 1 Emanuele Moscato 1 Luca Saglietti 1

# Abstract 

Understanding the learning process and the em-bedded computation in transformers is becom-ing a central goal for the development of inter-pretable AI. In the present study, we introduce a hierarchical filtering procedure for data mod-els of sequences on trees, allowing us to hand-tune the range of positional correlations in the data. Leveraging this controlled setting, we pro-vide evidence that vanilla encoder-only trans-formers can approximate the exact inference al-gorithm when trained on root classification and masked language modeling tasks, and study how 

this computation is discovered and implemented. We find that correlations at larger distances, cor-responding to increasing layers of the hierarchy, are sequentially included by the network dur-ing training. By comparing attention maps from models trained with varying degrees of filtering and by probing the different encoder levels, we find clear evidence of a reconstruction of corre-lations on successive length scales corresponding to the various levels of the hierarchy, which we relate to a plausible implementation of the exact inference algorithm within the same architecture. 

# 1. Introduction 

Transformer-based large language models have revolution-ized natural language processing, and have notably demon-strated their capacity to perfectly assimilate the grammati-cal rules of the languages they are trained on. While this ev-idence shows that transformers can handle and exploit the subtle long-range correlations that emerge in natural lan-guage, their inner workings remain largely unclear.               

> 1Department of Computing Sciences, Universit` aBoc-coni, Milan, Italy 2Department of Finance, Universit` a Boc-coni, Milan, Italy. Correspondence to: J´ erˆ ome Garnier-Brun
> <jerome.garnier@unibocconi.it >.
> Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine Learning , Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025 by the author(s).

Due to the complexity of the standard transformer archi-tecture (Vaswani et al., 2017), understanding what strategy is precisely implemented via the attention mechanism to solve a given problem has been limited so far to very simple tasks (Weiss et al., 2021; Zhong et al., 2024; Behrens et al., 2024). Nonetheless, significant results have been obtained by studying transformers on simplified models of language known as Context-Free Grammars (CFGs). Through prob-ing of the so-called parsing tree of CFGs, evidence has notably pointed towards transformers trained on predict-ing masked symbols implementing the optimal dynamic programming algorithm to reconstruct the hidden structure of the grammar, but alas without finding a fully plausible implementation within the architecture (Zhao et al., 2023; Allen-Zhu & Li, 2023). On the other hand, when tasked with reconstructing the most probable parsing tree in the context of probabilistic CFGs, transformers may struggle to match the optimal algorithm if ambiguity is high (Kha-lighinejad et al., 2023). Beyond language models, the significance of data structure in machine learning applications is well recognized yet re-mains poorly understood. CFGs represent a data structure characterized by hierarchical correlations (Mossel, 2016). In general, understanding how standard deep networks can take advantage of this hierarchical structure in their train-ing is an important research question. Towards this objec-tive, simplified hierarchical models of structured data on fixed trees have proved very useful in understanding the effectiveness of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) (Cagnetta et al., 2024), for which there are now formal results supporting the idea that the optimal Belief Propa-gation (BP) algorithm can be approximately implemented (Mei, 2024). Unfortunately, while the implementation of the hierarchy in CNNs is made quite transparent by the hi-erarchical structure of their convolutional filters, this is not true for transformers, and one can therefore not straightfor-wardly transpose this interpretation to other architectures (Cagnetta & Wyart, 2024). In this work, we present a complementary study to those described above, which allows us to understand further 

how transformers approach optimal inference in a struc-tured data model. 1How Transformers Learn Structured Data: Insights From Hierarchical Filtering                                              

> Figure 1. Synthesis of our main results. (a) The proposed filtered hierarchical model, illustrated here with ℓ= 3 layers and with a filtering parameter 0≤k≤ℓ, allowing one to truncate the hierarchy and generate data with more or less structure. (b) Scatter plot of the predictions of a trained transformer for a masked symbol ( ℓ= 4 ,k= 0 ,q= 4 possible states) versus the corresponding exact marginals obtained with the BP oracle, in-sample on 10 4sequences (top), and out-of-sample on uniformly generated sequences (bottom). (c) Evolution along training, on a root classification task with P= 2 17 examples ( ℓ= 4 ,k= 0 ,q= 4 ) of the average Kullback-Leibler divergence between transformer predictions and marginals obtained from the matched BP (black) and mismatched BP (from light green
> k= 1 to purple k= 4 ) on identical in-sample inputs, demonstrating the transformer learns increasingly structured representations. (d) Identical to (c) for a MLM task on P= 2 18 data. (e) Attention maps averaged over 10 4in-sample inputs, for a transformer with
> nL=ℓ= 4 layers of attention trained on the MLM task with fully hierarchical data, exhibiting a structure that mirrors the organization of the generative tree and the sequence of operations of BP. (f) Test accuracy on root classification on fully hierarchical data ( ℓ= 4 ,
> k= 0 ,q= 4 ) versus number of labeled training samples Pwith no pretraining ( ◦) compared to MLM pretraining with frozen ( □) and unfrozen ( ♢) encoder weights during fine-tuning.

Our contributions. We propose a controlled hierarchical model of discrete sequences, in which we can easily tune the strength of correlations between tokens thanks to a “fil-tering” parameter k, illustrated in Fig. 1(a). This tree-based probabilistic graphical model gives us access to the exact 

inference algorithm for reconstructing any symbol on the tree, Belief Propagation (BP) (M´ ezard & Montanari, 2009). Leveraging this context, we show that • Transformers not only approach optimal performance in root classification and Mask Language Modeling (MLM) tasks, but they spontaneously do so in a cal-ibrated way—i.e., by predicting probabilities that ap-proximate those yielded by the BP oracle even on out-of-sample inputs, see Fig. 1(b)—which provides evi-dence of an equivalence in computation to the exact inference algorithm. • When trained with stochastic gradient descent, trans-formers sequentially discover the existence of higher hierarchical correlation levels (i.e., longer-range cor-relations), progressively aligning with the prediction of algorithms that impute only parts of the full corre-lation structure, see Fig. 1(c)-(d). In other words, our simplified setting allows us to understand how trans-formers learn from structured data in time .• Well-trained transformers reconstruct the correct hi-erarchical structure through the succession of atten-tion blocks. Matching the number of transformer lay-ers to the number of layers in the generative tree, we find that the attention maps are compatible with a natural implementation of BP within the architecture, see Fig. 1(e). We verify this affinity through prob-ing experiments, providing strong clues on how trans-formers learn from our structured data in “space” ,thereby explaining the effectiveness of unsupervised pre-training for supervised classification tasks, illus-trated in Fig. 1(f). The paper is organized as follows. First, we provide a detailed description of our tunable hierarchical model in Sec. 2. We then perform numerical experiments on stan-dard transformer architectures in Sec. 3, shedding light on the learning dynamics. The understanding of the imple-mentation learned by the transformer, and its compatibility with a possible implementation of the BP algorithm in the architecture that we propose, is analyzed in-depth in Sec. 4. 2How Transformers Learn Structured Data: Insights From Hierarchical Filtering 

We finally conclude and discuss the wider implications of our results in Sec. 5. 

# 2. A model with filtered correlations 

2.1. The full hierarchical model 

We consider a tree-based generative process producing structured sequences of discrete symbols. We here focus on the fixed tree topology case, allowing for direct control over the effective range of the hierarchical correlations in-duced in the generated sequences (2.2), and enabling exact and efficient inference through Belief Propagation (2.4). The “full” hierarchical generative process shown in the first row of Fig 1(a) can be described as follows. The chain starts from an initial symbol x0, which we will refer to as the root of the tree, sampled with probability p0 from a vocabulary X = {1, . . . , q }. Then, the first layer of the tree is drawn randomly using a transition tensor M, which assigns the probability of generating some children—from the same vocabulary X —given a parent (here x0). In this work, we will restrict ourselves to binary trees for simplic-ity. We therefore have M ∈ Rq×q×q 

> +

, with Mabc the proba-bility of generating the pair (b, c ) given a parent a. Since its elements are transition probabilities, this tensor should satisfy Mabc ∈ [0 , 1] ∀ a, b, c and P 

> bc

Mabc = 1 ∀ a. The process, with the same tensor M, is then repeated indepen-dently for each of the newly created children nodes for a total of ℓ generations, eventually yielding a sequence of 2ℓ

symbols {xi}i=1 ,..., 2ℓ . We will refer to the symbols in the sequence as the leaves of the generative tree. The class of transition tensors M that we use is defined pre-cisely in Appendix A. In short, we will resort to randomly sampled log-normal transition probabilities, yielding com-plex long-range correlations along the sequences. Impor-tantly, we will only consider tensors with non-overlapping entries, such that: if Mabc > 0, then ∀a′̸ = a M a′bc = 0 .As a result, the production rules of our unfiltered generative model are non-ambiguous in the sense that a pair of chil-dren symbols can only have a single parent. Given all the symbols on the leaves, one can therefore deterministically 

reconstruct the underlying generative tree, all the way up to the root. 

2.2. Filtering hierarchical correlations 

We develop a filtering tool that enables control over the cor-relation structure in the generated sequences. In particular, we consider a family of generative models, indexed by an integer k ≤ ℓ, with hierarchical correlations truncated at a given depth k of the tree. In the k = 0 case described in the previous paragraph, all children generated at any level of the tree are sampled in pairs from their respective parents and are strongly cor-related. When k > 0, we instead generate the tree by drawing the children at level k conditionally independently 

given the root, with the same marginals as the full ( k = 0 )model. Then, for layers below layer k, the generative pro-cess is the standard one described above, inducing correla-tions within blocks of 2ℓ−k tokens. The procedure is illus-trated in Fig. 1(a), where dashed segments indicate condi-tional independence. In order to match the correct marginal probabilities in the truncated models, the conditional independent sampling at level k is done as follows. For each of the 2k variables at level k, say xj ,1 one considers the unique path that relates the root to this intermediate child in the original fully hier-archical tree, yielding a probability 

P (xj = b | x0 = a) = 



p0M σ0(j)M σ1(j) . . . M σk−1(j)

> a,b

,

(1) with σm(j) ∈ { L, R } indicating whether the path leading to the tree element j considered at layer k takes a left or right branching at the previous layer m. The q × q tran-sition matrices M L and M R are computed by tracing the original tensor 

M Lab = X

> c

Mabc , M Rac = X

> b

Mabc . (2) By constructing filtered trees in such a way, we ensure that the conditional correlations of the leaves capture up to the 

kth level of the hierarchy. Note, however, that when k > 0

the root can no longer be recovered deterministically from the leaves. 

2.3. Related data models Context-free grammars. Our hierarchical model can be considered as an instance of a simplified probabilis-tic context-free grammar (PCFG) with log-normally dis-tributed transition rates (De Giuli, 2019). The simplifica-tion is two-fold. Standard CFGs typically include two dis-tinct sets of symbols, non-terminals and terminals, repre-senting parts of speech—i.e. nouns, verbs etc.—and actual words respectively, plus a root symbol. Here, instead, we consider a single vocabulary X for all the symbols in the tree, including the root—which allows us to define a root classification task. Moreover, the parsing trees underlying CFGs are not fixed: terminals can be produced at differ-ent levels and the sequence length can vary. Instead, we assume a fixed parsing tree for our model, where the 2ℓ

leaves are collected from the last layer—which allows us to define a filtering procedure based on removing layers of hidden symbols above the leaves.            

> 1Here we take j > 2ℓto refer to the internal nodes of the tree, while x0remains the root and xiwith i= 1 , . . . , 2ℓare the leaves.

3How Transformers Learn Structured Data: Insights From Hierarchical Filtering 

The Random Hierarchy Model. Our model is closely related to the recently introduced Random Hierarchy Model (RHM) of Cagnetta et al. (2024), which was studied to improve the understanding of the effect of hierarchical structures on generative diffusion (Sclocchi et al., 2025) or last token prediction (Cagnetta & Wyart, 2024). The main differences to our formulation are that in the RHM the al-lowed transitions have uniform transition rates—while we consider a log-normal distribution—and that the produc-tion rules depend on the layer—while we here consider a single transition tensor throughout the tree. Correlations between the leaves arise in the RHM when some children pairs cannot be produced, leading to a reduced entropy of viable sequences. Having non-uniform transitions in our model similarly limits the entropy, while leading to a sig-nificantly different correlation structure. One should for in-stance notice that the staircase decrease of the correlations as a function of the distance between leaves presented in Cagnetta & Wyart (2024) is not visible in our case. 

2.4. Exact inference 

A key advantage of generating sequences through a tree-based process is that we can perform exact inference ef-ficiently using a dynamic programming approach. More-over, the fixed tree topology allows us to consider a simpli-fied version of the general inside-outside algorithm (Baker, 1979), which can be written in a message-passing form within the Belief Propagation (BP) formalism (Sato, 2007; M´ ezard & Montanari, 2009). Assuming that the transi-tion tensor M and root probabilities p0 are known, with BP one can compute the exact marginal probabilities for all the symbols at any position in the tree, with a computa-tional cost linear in the size of the tree. More precisely, on the tree structures we consider, BP can be shown to con-verge in 2( ℓ − k + 1) steps i.e. an upwards and downwards pass along the tree. This procedure can be used to infer the root given the leaves and to find the most likely value of a masked leaf (or set of leaves) given the rest of the se-quence: we’ll use it as an optimal solution against which to compare our numerical results. The details on the BP scheme for the filtered tree graphs we are considering can be found in Appendix B. 

# 3. How transformers learn to climb the hierarchy in time 

3.1. Experimental setup 

We will focus on the encoder-only variant (Devlin et al., 2019) of the celebrated “vanilla” transformer architecture, introduced in (Vaswani et al., 2017). A full recap of this parametrization is given in Appendix C. In a nutshell, each of the sequence elements xi ∈{1, . . . , q } is first converted to a positionally-informed to-ken x(0)  

> i

∈ Rd. For our experiments, we consider d =128 and the standard sinusoidal positional encoding of (Vaswani et al., 2017). Each transformer block in the net-work then maps the previous encoded sequence onto a new sequence of tokens with the same length and embedding di-mension, through a concatenation of a self-attention layer and a fully connected layer, with residual connections and layer normalization. The self-attention layer importantly introduces some mixing between the different tokens in the sequence, represented by what we will refer to as an at-tention matrix A ∈ R2ℓ×2ℓ 

> +

. We take the fully connected layer to be a standard 2-layer network with relu activations and hidden dimension d′ = 2048 . Following these opera-tions, repeated nL times to obtain the full encoder, we ob-tain a position-dependent high-dimensional representation of each of the original symbols in the sequence. What is finally done with this sequence of tokens depends on the task at hand: we consider root classification in Sec. 3.2 and masked language modeling in Sec. 3.3. Motivated by our focus on understanding the transformer’s implementation, we will take the number of attention layers to match the depth of the unfiltered generative tree, nL = ℓ.Studying varying values of k for the training data will ef-fectively allow us to explore cases where there are more at-tention layers than hierarchical levels in the generative tree, while we discuss the consequences of having nL smaller than the number of hierarchical levels in Appendix E.1. In the following, all numerical experiments are performed on the same realization of the transition tensor, randomly sampled for q = 4 using the parametrization described in Appendix A (see also our Reproducibility Statement be-low). While there may be quantitative differences for dif-ferent randomly generated tensors—particularly at small 

q—results remain qualitatively unchanged in experiments on different grammars, see Appendix E.2. 

3.2. Supervised classification 

In the context of our model, a natural idea is to use the root of a tree x0 as a label for the generated sequence {xi}, and to train a transformer encoder architecture on the associated classification task using a dataset of P labeled sequences. To perform the root prediction, the tokens in the final layer are concatenated position-wise (forming a large d × 2ℓ vec-tor) and fed to a linear readout, which outputs q logits as-sociated with the possible root symbols. The network is trained by minimizing the cross-entropy loss between these logits and the correct one-hot encoding of the root. 

Optimal test accuracy. We find that given sufficient la-beled data P ≥ P ∗, transformers achieve perfect in-sample root classification accuracy in the fully hierarchical model, 4How Transformers Learn Structured Data: Insights From Hierarchical Filtering 10 3 10 4 10 5                                   

> P
> 0.60.81.0
> Test accuracy
> (a)
> 0 10 010 110 2
> Epoch
> 0.20.40.60.81.0(b)
> Figure 2. (a) Evolution of the root prediction accuracy on full hi-erarchical ktest = 0 test samples for transformers trained on P
> labeled samples generated with ktrain = 0 ,1,2,3,4(top to bot-tom). Dashed lines indicate, the accuracy computed with the BP k
> algorithm on unfiltered data. (b) Evolution of the root prediction accuracy of the ktrain = 0 model computed on filtered test datasets, with ktest = 0 ,1,2,3,4(top to bottom), for transformers trained on P= 2 17 ktrain = 0 data. Dashed lines represent the out-of-sample BP 0prediction. In both plots ℓ= 4 ,q= 4 .

k = 0 , as illustrated in Fig. 2(a). When the training data has filtering parameter k > 0, the networks approach the optimal in-sample accuracy predicted by BP k, see Fig. 8 of Appendix E.3. Notice that, while in the case k = 0 the exact algorithm finds the value of the root with accuracy 

1, this is no longer the case for k ≥ 1 where the optimal accuracy is < 1.Different from the Random Hierarchy Model of Cagnetta et al. (2024), characterizing analytically the scaling of P ∗

with the parameters of the grammar with our non-uniform transition probabilities is a challenging goal, and is left for future work. Still, we discuss the role of the filtering pa-rameter k of the data model on the sample complexity in Appendix E.3 

Out-of-sample testing. In our data model, one can also test out-of-sample with respect to the filtering parameter k.For example, we test models trained on intermediate fil-tered data on a fully hierarchical dataset, i.e., ktrain > 0

and ktest = 0 , in Fig. 2(a), or vice-versa, i.e., ktrain = 0 

and ktest > 0, in Fig. 2(b). In both cases, the transformers achieve a performance that exactly matches that of BP ktrain ,in the presence of the same mismatch between the assumed inference model and the data generative model. We stress that, in this mismatched task, the BP prediction is no longer optimal, yet the trained networks systematically reach the same accuracy. This observation provides the first evidence that the transformers are implementing an approximation of the BP ktrain algorithm matched to the training data distri-bution. 

Full prediction matching. So far, we have established that the trained transformers match the accuracy of the ex-act inference algorithm on the root prediction in- and out-of-sample. We can however go one step further, as the transformers output q logits, which were passed through an arg max operation to yield a prediction. Taking the 

softmax instead gives a normalized q-dimensional vec-tor, which we can interpret as the predicted probabilities of the root symbol given the input sequence, to be com-pared to the exact marginals obtained with BP. We find a close match at the end of training, as shown by the small Kullback-Leibler divergences averaged over in-sample in-puts in the k = 0 case in Fig. 1(c), and similarly for 

k ≥ 0, on both in-sample and entirely out-of-sample in-puts in Fig. 9 of the Appendix. While such a match is not entirely surprising in the deterministic k = 0 problem, as the one-hot encoding of the root label against which the transformer logits are compared at training corresponds to the exact marginal distribution yielded by BP 0, the match is highly non-trivial in the ambiguous k > 0 instances, where the transformer is never explicitly guided towards the cor-rect values during training, as the one-hot encoding of the root label does not correspond to the exact marginals any-more. This calibration therefore provides a second strong piece of evidence that the transformers spontaneously im-plement exact inference. 

Supervised learning dynamics. Looking more specifi-cally at the learning dynamics of a network trained on the full hierarchy sheds some light on the learning process of the transformer encoder. Fig. 2(b) shows the evolution of the test accuracy of the ktrain = 0 model both in-sample, with ktest = 0 data, and out-of-sample, on filtered data with 

ktest > 0. One can notice multiple stages in the learning procedure: in the first epochs, the network imputes a sim-plistic explanation of the training data, resolving the leaf-to-root correlations—aided by the supervised signal—, as well as the short-range correlations between the leaves. As a result, the test accuracy increases for all values of ktest .As time progresses and longer-range correlations are dis-covered in the training data, the accuracy on the most fil-tered datasets drops towards the mismatched BP 0 predic-tion, since the imputed higher correlation levels are not present in the out-of-sample ktest > 0 data. In the mean-time, the accuracy for the smallest values of ktest keeps in-creasing. In a limited number of epochs, as the network perfectly learns to infer the root on ktest = 0 data, the BP 0

oracle accuracy is reached on test sets generated with all levels of factorization. This picture can be further refined by considering the pre-dictions of a transformer trained on the full hierarchy and the evolution of their distance from the marginals predicted on the same data by the BP k oracles, for all k ≥ 0. As 5How Transformers Learn Structured Data: Insights From Hierarchical Filtering 

illustrated by the DKL in Fig. 1(c), we observe an ini-tial stronger alignment to BP ℓ, which only considers leaf-to-root correlations. As training on ktrain = 0 data pro-gresses and the transformer shifts towards the correct pre-diction, the model predictions sequentially align to versions of BP that incorporate more and more of the correlation structure—i.e., BP k with decreasing values of k.

3.3. Masked Language Modeling 

We now turn to self-supervised training, where the model learns from a dataset of P unlabeled sequences. In sim-ple terms, the Masked Language Modeling (MLM) train-ing procedure consists of randomly masking parts of the sequences and asking the model to recover them from the context. This is closer to what is done in practice to train large language models, see e.g. Devlin et al. (2019); Liu et al. (2019). While in principle one could mask several symbols simultaneously in training, we focus on single-symbol masking—at a random position in the sequence— in the following, given the limited length of our sequences (a single symbol representing already 6.25% of the se-quence for ℓ = 4 ). Contrary to the root inference task, in MLM perfect accuracy cannot be achieved even in the fully hierarchical case, because of the stochastic nature of the branching process in the generative tree. The optimal performance is still yielded by the BP matched to the test data. To reconstruct the masked symbol, we now feed a single token, selected from the final transformer encoding at the positions associated with the masked element, to a linear layer producing a vector of logits. The network is then trained by minimizing the cross-entropy loss between these logits and the one-hot encoding of the masked element in the sequence. 

Optimal reconstruction performance. Given sufficient data, we find that transformers again approach optimal in-sample accuracy on data with any level of filtering. We show the case trained on ktrain = 0 in Fig. 3(a), where the transformer reaches the BP 0 accuracy also on out-of-sample test data with ktest > 0. Consistent with intuition, the required amount of training data P ∗ is increased rel-ative to the supervised task, as the network must learn to resolve the weak long-range correlations in the sequence without any supervised signal from the top of the hierar-chy. Moreover, compared to root classification, the net-works trained for MLM require much longer training to approach optimal performance—typically ∼ 10 3 epochs in place of a mere ∼ 10 epochs for classification—, see Fig. 3(a) vs Fig. 2(b). 

Full prediction matching. To go beyond test accuracy, we also consider the full probabilities outputted by the 0 10 0 10 1 10 2 10 3                         

> Epoch
> 0.40.6
> Test accuracy  (a)
> 3210
> Tree layer
> 0.40.60.81.0
> (b)
> 4321
> Figure 3. (a) Evolution of the MLM test accuracy computed on filtered test datasets, with ktest = 0 ,1,2,3,4(from top to bot-tom), for a model trained on ktrain = 0 data and P= 2 17 . The dashed lines represent the in- and out-of-sample BP 0predictions. (b) Test accuracy in the ancestor prediction task (layer 0 is the root) with ktrain =ktest = 0 obtained by reading out the interme-diate transformer encoding levels (legend) of a model pre-trained on the full hierarchy. The readout is trained on 214 labeled exam-ples. In both plots ℓ= 4 ,q= 4 .

transformer. As shown in the top panel Fig. 1(b), we find a close match with the exact marginals obtained from BP when measured on in-sample inputs. To confirm the gener-ality of this correspondence, we extend the comparison to uniformly sampled data in the bottom panel of Fig. 1(b). In this setting, we still observe high correlations between the outputs, albeit with more dispersion related to the markedly atypical nature of these test samples compared to the train-ing data distribution. Measuring the alignment using the Kullback-Leibler divergence, shown in Fig. 1(d), or else the sample-specific prediction match and Spearman (rank-ing) correlation between the two discrete probability dis-tributions, shown in Fig. 10 of Appendix E.4, confirms the near equivalence between transformer and BP compu-tation. Note again the remarkable calibration of the log-its, although the network is trained with hard labels for the masked symbols despite the probabilistic nature of the task. 

Self-supervised learning dynamics. By analyzing the out-of-sample performance with different filtering levels, we also unveil the sequential nature of the MLM learn-ing process. Computing the test accuracy on all ktest lev-els throughout the training dynamics, we observe a clean “staircase” behavior in the test accuracy, as shown in Fig. 3(a). This picture confirms and clarifies the experi-ments in Fig. 2(b), showing that the network sequentially resolves the nested levels of the hierarchy, in a bottom-up order. Note that the observation of the shorter-range corre-lations being learned first is consistent with the signal-to-noise picture exposed in Cagnetta & Wyart (2024). More-over, the presence of a sequential mechanism of discovery and resolution of different moments of the data distribution 6How Transformers Learn Structured Data: Insights From Hierarchical Filtering 

has been studied in (Refinetti et al., 2023; Bardone & Goldt, 2024; Rende et al., 2024). Overall, the convergence of the transformer to both the in-sample and the out-of-sample token prediction accuracy of BP supports the claim that the model learns to implement a close approximation of the exact algorithm. The learning mechanism is also con-firmed by the behavior of DKL along the training, shown in Fig. 1(d): analogous to the root inference case, but more qualitatively compelling, the predictions of a transformer trained on the fully hierarchical data sequentially align with the marginals yielded by BP k, with decreasing k as training progresses and longer-range correlations are accounted for. 

# 4. How transformers embed the exact inference computation 

Attention map analysis. In the root inference task, the readout performing the prediction is fed with the entire se-quence of tokens. As a result, there are many ways for the transformer encoder to distribute the computation across its layers, and no necessity for single tokens to carry informa-tion on all the ancestry levels in the tree, making it a non-ideal setting for mechanistic interpretation. 2 In the MLM task, on the other hand, single token encodings are used to predict the masked symbols. This requirement seems to guide the model towards more interpretable attention maps, shedding some light on how the model may approximate the optimal algorithm. They are shown in Fig. 4, each row referring to a transformer encoder trained on data with dif-ferent filtering levels— k increasing from top to bottom. In the fully filtered case (bottom row) there is no need to combine the different elements of the sequence before the readout and the attention matrices are nearly uniform. Now, as we reduce the level of filtering in the generative process, clear patterns emerge in the attention map. First, the model focuses on short-ranged correlations be-tween nearest neighbors when k = 3 and, as we decrease 

k, towards patterns of size ∼ 2ℓ−k, which is the exact size of the stronger correlated block with a filtering parameter 

k—see Sec. 2. Note that the similarity between the k = 1 

and k = 0 cases (top two rows) is natural, the tree topol-ogy in these two cases being identical and with only the transition probabilities for this first layer differing. Interestingly, the network naturally organizes the attention layers hierarchically. This is particularly visible when there are fewer redundant layers i.e. in the cases k = 0 , 1 (two top rows in Fig. 4). Such a layout is consistent with the BP algorithm on the full tree, where one combines ele-ments pairwise while going up the tree. While a typical                              

> 2Note that transformers trained on the classification task still present some patterns related to the hierarchical nature of the data model, albeit less clearly, see Appendix E.5.
> Figure 4. Visualization of the nL= 4 attention matrices (aver-aged over 10 4input sequences) for transformers trained on the MLM task on different filtered datasets, with k= 0 ,1,2,3,4
> (top to bottom rows), and P= 2 18 ,ℓ= 4 ,q= 4 .For the fully factorized model, k= 4 , where the leaves are independent conditional to the root the attention matrix appears structureless. When kdecreases one sees the emergence of attention blocks of size ≤∼ 2ℓ−k. For k= 0 ,1, the trained attention matrices reflect all the hierarchies of the correlations.

BP implementation includes a downward pass, it is possi-ble to avoid this step if the token embedding dimension, 

d, is sufficiently large. To illustrate this point, we propose an existence proof of a plausible implementation of the BP algorithm in an architecture. 

Exact transformer embedding of BP. In a natural im-plementation of BP, inference for the MLM task requires the messages from the visible leaves to reach the top of the hierarchy and descend back to the masked symbol, effec-tively propagating through 2ℓ layers. A proposal in Zhao et al. (2023) for a transformer embedding of the inside-outside parsing algorithm—a generalization of the above-described BP to the unknown topology setting—requires as many transformer blocks as double the sequence length— here 2ℓ—, and an attention head per hidden symbol in the hierarchy. Thus, it might seem surprising that a single-head transformer encoder with ℓ blocks could be sufficient to mimic the BP algorithm. To prove the feasibility of its implementation within these architectural constraints, we propose an idealized transformer implementation of the BP algorithm. Note that some of the key ingredients of this feasible implementation are introduced for the sake of in-terpretability but are not imposed in our experiments, and 7How Transformers Learn Structured Data: Insights From Hierarchical Filtering 

therefore this does not represent an exact explanation of the trained transformer computation. The complete existence argument is deferred to Appendix F, while here we provide a high-level description of some key ideas. We consider a fully disentangled embedding of positional and semantic information in the vectorized tokens, con-tained in d = q(q + 2) + ℓ dimensions. The isolation of the semantic information allows the implementation of a simple position-based attention mechanism, inspired by the factor graph structure, and compatible with the attention matrices in Fig. 4. Then, going up the hierarchy requires the computation of a trace of products (see equation 6 in Appendix B), which can be well approximated by the fully connected layers in the second part of the transformer blocks, provided the attention selects the right terms in the product. The less intuitive component of the implementa-tion is the computation of the messages directed towards the leaves, used in the MLM task. Given the limit on the number of transformer blocks, this computation must be done in parallel with the upward climb of the hierarchy, de-spite the missing downward messages. It turns out that, by exploiting O(q2) memory slots in the token embedding— and thus with an increased memory cost compared to BP— a different recursion with the same result as the standard message-passing can be implemented, within the nL = ℓ

constraint for the number of transformers layers. 

Probing the encoder representations. To confirm that the computation going up the tree is distributed sequen-tially in the transformer blocks, consistent with the pro-posed embedding of BP, we undertake a probing experi-ment similar to those performed e.g. in Zhao et al. (2023). First, we analyze the encoder trained for the MLM task on k = 0 data, cf. top row of Fig. 4. Keeping the en-coder weights frozen , we investigate how much information about the ancestors of any leaf is contained in the succes-sive hidden representations of the corresponding token— see Appendix E.6 for implementation details. While in the exact embedding of BP the k-th level ancestor information must be available at layer k to iterate the recursion for the downgoing messages, the MLM training does not set such a requirement. To probe the encodings, we employ a spe-cialized two-layer readout for each encoder-layer/ancestry-level pair—independent of the token position—trained on a supervised dataset with 214 examples. In Fig. 3(b), we show that the prediction accuracy is high on ancestors up to the same level as the probed layer and deteriorates on higher levels of ancestry. Note that, unless the information about the entire block of 2ℓ−k tokens is properly mixed in through the attention mechanism, a perfectly accurate prediction of the common kth level ancestor from a sin-gle token representation is impossible, as the mapping be-comes non-deterministic. Moreover, the “overfitting” sce-nario, where the ancestors are reconstructed solely by the trained probes and the sequential reconstruction is an ar-tifact, can be ruled out by considering the gap between the accuracies achieved from different layers—the relative comparisons are fair since the readouts are trained on the same datasets—, and by training the probes only on some positions—see Appendix E.7. In Appendix E.7, we also conduct similar ancestor predic-tion experiments on the last encoder layer of models trained with k > 0 data (lower rows of Fig. 4), where we again find that the ancestry information is consistent with the attention maps. 

Synergy between tasks and MLM pre-training. In the context of our model, we can straightforwardly explain why self-supervised pre-training allows a large speed-up in the supervised training process, in line with many em-pirical observations on real-world data (Howard & Ruder, 2018). We show in Fig. 1(f) an MLM pre-trained model fine-tuned for root inference. A significant reduction in the labeled data required to achieve optimal root inference — 

P ∗ in Sec. 3.2— is observed, both with frozen and with fine-tuned encoder weights. 

# 5. Conclusions 

By using a simple, tunable, hierarchical model of struc-tured sequences, we were able to shed some light on the inner workings of transformer encoders and better under-stand how they achieve optimal inference on both super-vised and self-supervised tasks. The modularity of our data model also allowed us to uncover how transform-ers sequentially implement longer-range correlations dur-ing the learning dynamics, compatible with similar con-trolled studies (Rende et al., 2024) and with the general un-derstanding of LLMs trained on natural language (Kaplan et al., 2020). This mechanism could perhaps be exploited to shape theory-driven curriculum learning strategies for NLP, where curating the presentation order of training examples was already proven effective (Campos, 2021). Moreover, because blocks of symbols inherited from common ances-tors are progressively integrated during training, learning our data model may perhaps be related to a form of motif learning, with increasingly longer motifs being identified over time (Wu et al., 2023). Generalizing our filtering-based interpretative tool to the case of variable sequence lengths (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2023; Zhao et al., 2023)—where the topology of the parsing tree is not known a priori —is a challenging but promising di-rection for approaching a more detailed understanding of the learning dynamics and the embedded computation in transformers trained on natural language. On the other hand, while the idealized model of structured sequences 8How Transformers Learn Structured Data: Insights From Hierarchical Filtering 

studied in the present work might be less suited for mod-eling natural language compared to standard CFGs, the ag-nostic nature of the approach could open connections to other related fields, like protein sequences analysis (Zhang et al., 2023) and immunology (Meynard-Piganeau et al., 2024). It could finally be interesting to undertake a similar investigation on the way transformers learn in other prob-lems where optimal inference can also be achieved via dy-namic programming (Mossel et al., 2014; 2023). 

# Acknowledgments 

The authors are grateful to Carlo Baldassi, Luca Biggio, Dirk Hovy and Gianmarco Perrupatto for fruitful discus-sions. JGB’s research was developed within the MUSA – Multilayered Urban Sustainability Action – project CUP B43D21011010006, funded by the European Union – NextGenerationEU, under the National Recovery and Re-silience Plan (NRRP) Mission 4 Component 2 Investment Line 1.5: Strenghtening of research structures and cre-ation of R&D “innovation ecosystems”, set up of “terri-torial leaders in R&D”. 

# Reproducibility statement 

We provide the source code used to perform our nu-merical experiments on the repository accessible at 

https://github.com/emanuele-moscato/ tree-language . It includes a Python script generating the data, as well as the PyTorch implementation of the transformer and training scripts for both root inference and MLM. It finally provides an efficient implementation of the Belief Propagation algorithm which can be used for both root inference and Masked Language Modeling. The data used to produce the figures in the main text corresponds to fixing seed = 0 and sigma = 1 in the data generation script, see Appendix A for details on the role of the latter. 

# Impact statement 

This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field of Machine Learning. There are many potential societal consequences of our work, none which we feel must be specifically highlighted here. 

# References 

Allen-Zhu, Z. and Li, Y. Physics of language mod-els: Part 1, context-free grammar. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13673 , 2023. Baker, J. K. Trainable grammars for speech recognition. 

The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America , 65 (S1):S132–S132, 1979. Bardone, L. and Goldt, S. Sliding down the stairs: How correlated latent variables accelerate learning with neu-ral networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 3024–3045. PMLR, 2024. Behrens, F., Biggio, L., and Zdeborov´ a, L. Understanding counting in small transformers: The interplay between attention and feed-forward layers. In ICML 2024 Work-shop on Mechanistic Interpretability , 2024. Cagnetta, F. and Wyart, M. Towards a theory of how the structure of language is acquired by deep neural net-works. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neu-ral Information Processing Systems , 2024. Cagnetta, F., Petrini, L., Tomasini, U. M., Favero, A., and Wyart, M. How deep neural networks learn composi-tional data: The random hierarchy model. Physical Re-view X , 14(3):031001, 2024. Campos, D. Curriculum learning for language modeling. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.02170 , 2021. De Giuli, E. Random language model. Physical Review Letters , 122(12):128301, 2019. Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., and Toutanova, K. BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Burstein, J., Doran, C., and Solorio, T. (eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Confer-ence of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pp. 4171– 4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. Howard, J. and Ruder, S. Universal language model fine-tuning for text classification. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 328– 339, 2018. Kaplan, J., McCandlish, S., Henighan, T., Brown, T. B., Chess, B., Child, R., Gray, S., Radford, A., Wu, J., and Amodei, D. Scaling laws for neural language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361 , 2020. Khalighinejad, G., Liu, O., and Wiseman, S. Approximat-ing CKY with transformers. In The 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,2023. Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 , 2014. Liu, Y., Ott, M., Goyal, N., Du, J., Joshi, M., Chen, D., Levy, O., Lewis, M., Zettlemoyer, L., and Stoyanov, V. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining ap-proach, 2019. 9How Transformers Learn Structured Data: Insights From Hierarchical Filtering 

Mei, S. U-nets as Belief Propagation: Efficient classifica-tion, denoising, and diffusion in generative hierarchical models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.18444 , 2024. Meynard-Piganeau, B., Feinauer, C., Weigt, M., Walczak, A. M., and Mora, T. Tulip: A transformer-based unsu-pervised language model for interacting peptides and t cell receptors that generalizes to unseen epitopes. Pro-ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 121(24): e2316401121, 2024. M´ ezard, M. and Montanari, A. Information, physics, and computation . Oxford University Press, 2009. Mossel, E. Deep learning and hierarchal generative models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.09057 , 2016. Mossel, E., Neeman, J., and Sly, A. Belief propagation, ro-bust reconstruction and optimal recovery of block mod-els. In Conference on Learning Theory , pp. 356–370. PMLR, 2014. Mossel, E., Sly, A., and Sohn, Y. Exact phase transitions for stochastic block models and reconstruction on trees. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing , pp. 96–102, 2023. Paszke, A., Gross, S., Massa, F., Lerer, A., Bradbury, J., Chanan, G., Killeen, T., Lin, Z., Gimelshein, N., Antiga, L., et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. Refinetti, M., Ingrosso, A., and Goldt, S. Neural networks trained with SGD learn distributions of increasing com-plexity. In International Conference on Machine Learn-ing , pp. 28843–28863. PMLR, 2023. Rende, R., Gerace, F., Laio, A., Goldt, S., et al. A distribu-tional simplicity bias in the learning dynamics of trans-formers. Advances in Neural Information Processing ,37, 2024. Sato, T. Inside-outside probability computation for belief propagation. In IJCAI , pp. 2605–2610. Citeseer, 2007. Sclocchi, A., Favero, A., and Wyart, M. A phase transi-tion in diffusion models reveals the hierarchical nature of data. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-ences , 122(1), 2025. Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, Ł., and Polosukhin, I. At-tention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. Weiss, G., Goldberg, Y., and Yahav, E. Thinking like trans-formers. In International Conference on Machine Learn-ing , pp. 11080–11090. PMLR, 2021. Wu, S., Thalmann, M., and Schulz, E. Motif learning facil-itates sequence memorization and generalization. 2023. Zhang, S., Fan, R., Liu, Y., Chen, S., Liu, Q., and Zeng, W. Applications of transformer-based language models in bioinformatics: a survey. Bioinformatics Advances , 3 (1):vbad001, 2023. Zhao, H., Panigrahi, A., Ge, R., and Arora, S. Do trans-formers parse while predicting the masked word? In 

Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Meth-ods in Natural Language Processing , pp. 16513–16542, 2023. Zhong, Z., Liu, Z., Tegmark, M., and Andreas, J. The clock and the pizza: Two stories in mechanistic explanation of neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 36, 2024. 

# A. Further details on our data model 

The transition tensor M—the “grammar” of our genera-tive model in CFG terminology—fully controls the prop-erties of the above-defined generative process. We define a parametrized ensemble of random grammars, from which multiple transition tensors can be sampled independently. Two grammars generated with the same parameters are ex-pected to share some high-level features and produce data of comparable complexity, at least in the large vocabu-lary size limit. Elaborating on recent work on context-free grammars (see Sec. 2.3 of the main text), we generate tran-sition probabilities as 

Mabc = ehabc 

P 

> b′c′

ehab ′c′ (3) where the logits habc are generated as 

habc =

(

σξ abc if (b, c ) ∈ O a,

−∞ otherwise , (4) with ξabc independent Gaussian random variables of zero mean and unit variance, and σ controlling the probability fluctuations between likely and unlikely transitions. Here, the q sets Oa build a equal-sized partition of the q2 possible children pairs (b, c ), i.e. Oa ∩ O a′ = ∅ if a̸ = a′ and | ∪ a

Oa| = q2. This non-overlapping prescription implies that the broadcast from the root to the leaves has no ambiguity. Therefore, as stated in the main text, if the transition tensor 

M is known, one can deterministically go up the hierarchy of the tree and infer the root given a set of leaves. We leave generalizations of this setting for future work. 10 How Transformers Learn Structured Data: Insights From Hierarchical Filtering   

> Figure 5. Illustration of the two types of BP updates: (a) above; (b) below the filter level k.

# B. The BP inference algorithm 

Here we present the exact Belief Propagation algorithm used as the gold standard against which to compare the nu-merical results. For the full derivation, see M´ ezard & Mon-tanari (2009). We start by randomly initializing an upgoing and downgoing message—each one being a vector in Rq

that represents a probability distribution over the q possible symbols—for each edge in the generative tree. In the fol-lowing, we denote with νj→α a message going from a so-called variable node j (shown by a circle in the sketches) to a factor node α (shown by a full or empty square in the sketches), and with ˆνα→j the message in the opposite di-rection. Wherever there is a known variable one should then fix νj→α[xj ] = δxj ,a , where a is the known value e.g. of the leaf. When the hierarchy is truncated, two distinct types of up-dates are possible, depending on whether one lies in the filtered or unfiltered regions of the tree. In the former, the root is directly connected to 2k “empty” factor nodes, as shown in Fig. 5(a), each connected to a single and distinct variable node below. In this case the BP fixed point equa-tions for messages from the root to the empty factor are given by 

ν0→αj [x0] ∝ Y 

> ℓ̸=j

ˆναℓ→0[x0], (5) i.e. outgoing messages are simply a product of the incom-ing messages from all the other edges. At each of the 2k

factor nodes, both upgoing and downgoing messages sat-isfy 

ˆναj →0[x0] ∝ X

> xj

P (xj | x0)νj→αj [xj ],

ˆναj →j [xj ] ∝ X

> x0

P (xj | x0)ν0→αj [x0],

(6) where P (xj | x0) is given by equation 1, and is specific to the factor node considered. The notation ∝ means that the messages—that are probabilities—are to be normalized (e.g. P 

> x0

ˆναj →0[x0] = 1 ). We now consider the lower, unfiltered part of the tree. As illustrated in Fig. 5(b), each of the “full” factor nodes is connected to three variable nodes, representing the parent and two children in the standard branching process. The outgoing messages from the factor node should satisfy 

ˆνα→u[xu] ∝ X

> xl,x r

Mxuxℓxr νl→α[xl]νr→α[xr ]. (7) For all variable nodes except for the root detailed above, the single outgoing messages are equal to the single incoming messages in these variable nodes at the previous/next layer of the tree. For example, the upgoing messages ν1→α1 in Fig. 5(a) is simply ˆνα→1, where α is the full factor node lying below variable 1 (assuming k < ℓ ). Efficient conver-gence to the fixed point is guaranteed if one starts from the leaves and updates the messages in an upgoing pass, and then performs a downgoing pass from the root, for a total of 2( ℓ − k + 1) steps. Once the messages have converged, any unknown variable can be optimally reconstructed by computing the marginals as 

μ[xi] ∝ Y

> α∈∂i

ˆνα→i[xi], (8) where ∂i is the set of factor nodes connected to variable node i. In our problem, this product will therefore typically be over a single factor node when inferring masked leaves, or 2k factor nodes when inferring the root. 

# C. Vanilla encoder-only transformer architecture 

A sequence of leaves {xi} generated by the hierarchical model and represented by 2ℓ integers is first converted into a sequence of one-hot vectors {xi}, with xi ∈ Bq . 3 Then, we perform the first encoding step producing a sequence of tokens {x(0)  

> i

} ∈ Rd, with arbitrary dimension d ≥ q,obtained through a learnable projection to the embedding space and the inclusion of positional encoding pi,

x(0)  

> i

= WE xi + pi, (9) with WE ∈ Rd×q and pi ∈ Rd. For our experiments, we consider d = 128 and the standard sinusoidal positional encoding of (Vaswani et al., 2017). As described in the main text, each transformer block in the       

> 3For simplicity, the procedure described here does not con-sider special tokens. In practice, we will take a vocabulary of size q+ 1 to account for masked symbols when doing MLM, see Devlin et al. (2019).

11 How Transformers Learn Structured Data: Insights From Hierarchical Filtering 

network then transforms the tokens as follows, 

˜x(l) 

> i

= layernorm 



x(l−1)  

> i

++selfattention( x(l−1) ; W (l) 

> Q

, W (l) 

> K

, W (l) 

> V

)



,

(10) 

x(l) 

> i

= layernorm 



˜x(l) 

> i

+ FC( ˜ x(l) 

> i

; W (l)1 , W (l)2 )



.

(11) The single-head self-attention layer considered in this work entails the computation of three different quantities from each token: the query qi = WQxi, the key ki = WK xi

and the value vi = WV xi. For simplicity, we take WQ,

WK and WV in Rd×d. The queries and keys are combined to compute the attention matrix 

Aij = softmax 

 qi · kj

√d



, (12) then used to build a linear combination of the values, 

selfattention( x; WQ, WK , WV ) = 

> 2ℓ

X

> j=1

Aij vj . (13) The fully-connected layer, instead, is a standard 2-layer network with relu activations: 

FC( xi; W1, W2) = W2 relu ( W1xi) , (14) where W1 ∈ Rd×d′

, W2 ∈ Rd′×d, and d′ = 2048 in our experiments. We refer the reader to the original paper by (Vaswani et al., 2017) for additional details on the trans-former encoder operations. 

# D. Further details on numerical experiments 

All numerical experiments presented in this paper were per-formed using PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) version 2.3.0. We use the Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) optimizer with batches of size 32 and a fixed learning rate of 10 −4, other parameters left as default. We did not find learning rate scheduling to provide significant benefits in our experi-ments. All models were initialized randomly using the de-fault settings (Xavier uniform distribution). In both root inference and MLM, the accuracy of the trans-former implementation and of the BP over M trials is mea-sured straightforwardly as 

Accuracy = 1

M

> M

X

> γ=1

δˆxν ,x ν , (15) where xν is understood as the ground truth and ˆxν the sym-bol inferred using the network or BP. The Kullback-Leibler divergence between two discrete probability distributions encoded as n-dimensional vectors 

u and v, is given by 

DKL (u ∥ v) = 

> n

X

> α=1

uα log 

 uα

vα



. (16) 

# E. Additional figures 

E.1. Influence of the number of attention layers 

Establishing a relation between the number of encoder lay-ers nL in the transformer and the ability to achieve this optimal classification on data generated from hierarchical models is also not straightforward. Indeed, given the con-catenation of operations involved in a single transformer block and the presence of residual and normalization lay-ers, the effective number of computational layers in a trans-former is not as explicit as in a multilayer perceptron or a CNN architecture. As apparent in the main text, setting 

nL = ℓ—or nL ≥ ℓ−k for filtered data—enables the trans-former to converge towards a very interpretable parameter configuration. However, this natural choice does not ap-pear to be strictly necessary for the transformers to achieve optimal inference, at least when the number of embedding dimensions d is large. More specifically, Fig. 6 shows that the test accuracy on the root classification task on k = 0 unfiltered data can reach the optimal value for nL < ℓ . While nL = ℓ = 4 is the most sample efficient, it is clear that nL = 3 provides com-parable performance, and only nL = 1 appears to lead to poor sample efficiency. In all the performed experiments, a bigger value for nL corresponded to better sample effi-ciency, which seems to indicate that more flexible models require less data to reach the same performance level de-spite the increased number of parameters to train. In any case, the required complexity of the architecture is clearly related to the amount of structure in the data model. As an extreme illustration, in the case of fully fil-tered correlations k = ℓ, the BP marginals for the root are just products of conditional probabilities on the leaves as 

P (x0 = a | { xi}) ∝ Q2ℓ 

> i=1

P (xi | x0 = a), i.e. a “Naive Bayes” classifier is optimal. Any layer of attention is thus superfluous since a standard feed-forward network with a single hidden layer is sufficient for this task. In fact, the analysis of the attention maps (trained this time on MLM) in Sec. 4 confirms this natural intuition, as most attention layers appear effectively unused by the transformer when 

nL > k .

E.2. Other grammars 

As expected from the log-normal nature of its entries, there may be significant sample to sample fluctuations in the 12 How Transformers Learn Structured Data: Insights From Hierarchical Filtering 10 3 10 4 10 5            

> P
> 0.60.81.0
> Test accuracy
> nL= 1
> nL= 2
> nL= 3
> nL= 4
> Figure 6. Reproduction of Fig. 1(b) with now nL≤4atten-tion layers in the transformer encoder and restricted to the “worst case” k= 0 unfiltered dataset.

transition tensor M for a given value of σ, which we ex-pect to (slowly) decay as q becomes large. All the results presented in the main text come from the same grammar with q = 4 , σ = 1 (corresponding to seed = 0 in the data generation script provided in the SM, see the Repro-ducibility Statement above), however we illustrate that all our conclusions should qualitatively hold for any realiza-tions of M in Fig. 7. Indeed, while there are some very clear differences in the “difficulty” of the grammars presented, the transformer architecture performs very similarly, here on the root inference task. All subsequent experiments can be reproduced on these different grammars, yielding an un-changed phenomenology. 

E.3. In-sample classification performance on filtered datasets 

Fig. 8 shows the test accuracy computed in-sample for the factorized datasets as a function of the training set size 

P . The optimal inference accuracy predicted by the Be-lief Propagation, which is not unity when k > 0, is reached by the transformers in all cases when trained on sufficient data. It appears that the required amount of data P ∗ for reaching optimal accuracy not only depends on the specific transi-tion tensor M (see Fig. 7 for an illustration for k = 0 ), but also on the level of factorization. For intermediate values of k, P ∗ is notably larger than with the k = 0 full hier-archy. This is due to the fact that the k = 0 case is quite unique for two (related) reasons. The first is that the logits outputted from the network need not be calibrated, so the accuracy can reach the optimum without the transformer having fully implemented an algorithm equivalent to BP, whereas the relative weights of prediction must be well un-derstood to match the optimal inference in the ambiguous 

k > 0 cases—in other words it is easier to match perfect accuracy with approximate weights when the true distri-bution is δ-distributed. The other is that this being said, matching the BP is also easier in the k = 0 case because it is the only case where the training cross-entropy loss corre-sponds exactly to that computed with the true marginals— that are also delta distributed due to the determinism of the task—whereas in the k > 0 cases the training loss does not guide explicitly to the exact marginals. The latter clearly appears in Fig. 9, showing the Kullback-Leibler di-vergence between the transformer outputted logits and the BP marginals instead of the test accuracy. Note that the other case which has a singularly small sam-ple complexity is that of the fully filtered data, k = ℓ, as it is implementable in a single feedforward layer and does not require an implementation equivalent to BP. 

E.4. Additional comparison of the outputs 

For completeness, we show the comparison between the full transformer predictions and the BP marginals through MLM training using the percentage of matches in the largest value (i.e. prediction match) and the spearman (or-dering) correlation in Fig. 10. These confirm the observa-tions described in the main text. 

E.5. Classifier attention maps 

Fig. 11 shows the attention maps resulting from the super-vised training for transformers achieving the optimal per-formance on datasets with different filtration levels. As in the masked language modeling task, one immediately notices the emergence of blocks of size ∼ 2ℓ−k. In this prescription, where tokens are not required to be fully de-scriptive, it is however difficult to identify a clear pattern relating to the distribution of the computation across the different layers. 

E.6. Details on the probing experiments 

In order to perform the experiments presented in Fig. 3(b), we replace the linear readout of a trained MLM transformer by a two-layer feedforward network with 64 hidden units, acting independently on all of the d-dimensional sequences (d = 128 in all of our experiments, see Sec. 3) outputted by the frozen transformer encoder. The training of the readout is performed on 214 labeled sequences, the labels being, for each of the elements of the sequence, the symbol on the relevant ancestor in the generative tree. Here again, the loss is taken to be the cross-entropy between the logits outputted by the network for each token and their correct ancestor label, then averaged on all the sequence elements. We present another experiment, where the cross-entropy is measured only with the first and the last token embeddings of the sequence, just below. The readout is trained on 100 epochs in all cases, which we found to be sufficient for the 13 How Transformers Learn Structured Data: Insights From Hierarchical Filtering 10 3 10 4 10 5    

> P
> 0.40.60.81.0
> Test accuracy
> 10 310 410 5
> P
> 10 310 410 5
> P

Figure 7. Reproduction of Fig. 1(b) on other realizations of the transition tensor M for the same parameters ℓ = 4 , q = 4 , σ = 1 . We remind that for the k > 0 cases, the BP predictions (dashed lines) are not Bayes optimal, as the test accuracy is measured out-of-sample here. From left to right, these grammars can be reproduced by fixing seed = {1,15,31 } in the data generation code provided in the SM. 10 4 10 6

> P
> 0.40.60.81.0
> Test accuracy

Figure 8. Reproduction of Fig. 2(a) with the test accuracy com-puted on (in-sample) factorized data, rather than the out-of-sample testing presented in the main text. 10 3 10 4 10 5  

> P
> 10 −3
> 10 −2
> 10 −1
> 10 0
> DKL
> 10 310 410 5
> P

Figure 9. Reproduction of Fig. 8 with the Kullback-Leibler diver-gence between the transformer outputs BP marginals for identical levels of factorizations for (Left) in-sample inputs, (Right) uni-formly randomly generated inputs. 0 10 0 10 1 10 2 10 3   

> Epochs
> 020 40 60 80 100
> Prediction match to BP (%)
> 0 10 010 110 210 3
> Epochs
> 0.00.20.40.60.81.0
> Spearman correlation

Figure 10. Reproduction of Fig. 1(d) with the prediction (i.e. 

arg max ) match (left) and Spearman (i.e. ranking) correlation (right) between the transformer outputs and BP marginals. 

Figure 11. Reproduction of Fig. 4 for the supervised task on fil-tered datasets of size P = 2 17 for k = 0 and P = 2 20 for k > 0.

14 How Transformers Learn Structured Data: Insights From Hierarchical Filtering 3210                  

> Tree layer
> 0.40.60.81.0
> Test accuracy
> 4321
> 3210
> Tree layer
> Figure 12. (Left) Reproduction of the probing experiment pre-sented in Fig. 3(b), with the readout trained only on the first and last token embeddings of the sequences and tested on all elements. (Right) Test accuracy in the ancestor prediction task (layer 0 is the root) with ℓ=4,q=4,ktest =0, obtained by read-ing out the complete transformer encoding of models pre-trained
> ktrain = 0 ,1,2,3,4(from top to bottom), i.e. using the attention maps illustrated in Fig. 4 The readout is trained on 214 labeled examples.

relatively small training set size we used. 

E.7. Further probing experiments 

To complement and contextualize the probing experiments presented in the main text, we provide two additional ex-periments. In the left panel of Fig. 12, we perform the same experiment as in Fig.3(b), but with probes trained only on two positions in the token sequence (first and last) and tested across all positions. While some accuracy is lost, since the readout cannot fully disentangle the posi-tional information from the semantic one in positions that were never seen at training, the sequential effect is still ev-ident. Moreover, we also performed the same procedure as Fig. 3(b) on the tokens’ hidden representations, but with models trained on factorized data. As visible in the right panel of Fig. 12, a model trained of filtered data can only accurately recover ancestors up to the level in which filter-ing kicks in. For example, in an l = 4 tree, a model trained on ktrain = 2 data can only predict ancestors up to level 2

(two ancestry layers above the leaves—above that, the tree is filtered), while a model trained on ktrain = 3 can only predict ancestors up to level 3 (the ancestors right above the leaves - for the same reason). This is exactly what could be expected from the attention maps of Fig. 4. As before, we are probing the hidden representations of individual tokens, so this happens because the attention must provide mixing between ∼ 2ℓ−k elements of the sequence in order for in-dividual tokens to carry information up to the level k of the fully hierarchical generative model. 

# F. A possible transformer implementation of Belief Propagation 

We show here how the BP algorithm for leaf inference can be implemented using ℓ layers of transformers with token sizes which are compatible with what is used in our exper-iments. We consider the “worst case” scenario of a com-plete, unfiltered tree generative process of depth ℓ.

Token embedding. We propose an implementation that relies on vectorized tokens with a structure of the form 

x(m) 

> i

=



r(1 ,m )

> i

...

r(q,m )

> i

m(m)

> i

m(m)

> i

˜pi



, (17) where: • i ∈ { 1, ..., 2ℓ} is the index of a leaf • m ∈ { 1, ..., ℓ } is the index of a transformer layer • r(1 ,m ) 

> i

, . . . , r(q,m ) 

> i

are q vectors of dimension q (q2 el-ements in total) storing the quantities needed to com-pute the final leaf marginals, • m(m) 

> i

is a vector of size q storing the up-going mes-sage for the ancestor of leaf i at level m,• m(m) 

> i

is a vector of size q storing the up-going mes-sage for the mth complementary ancestor of leaf i, see Fig. 13, • ˜pi is a ℓ-dimensional binary vector containing posi-tional information on the full path from root to leaf i

(see below). In this prescription, the total dimension of each token is therefore d = q2 + 2 q + ℓ.

Initialization. We are going to consider the following initialization, 



r(a, 0) 

> i



> b

= 1

q , ∀a, b = 1 , . . . , q, (18) 

m(0)  

> i

= 0, (19) while the messages m(0)  

> i

should be initialized as in the standard BP given a sequence, i.e. with a Kronecker δ for known symbols and a uniform vector for masked leaves. The positional vector ˜pi should finally be a binary ±1 vec-tor representing the sequence of left/right turns from the root to leaf i (as σ in equation 1). 15 How Transformers Learn Structured Data: Insights From Hierarchical Filtering   

> Figure 13. Illustration of the upgoing messages embedded in the tokens of the transformer implementation of BP for a tree with
> ℓ= 3 . Complementary ancestors are shown with dashed lines.

Attention layer. In our implementation, the dot product 



W (m) 

> Q

x(m)

> i

⊤ 

W (m) 

> K

x(m)

> j



entering the softmax and at the heart of the attention mech-anism only encodes positional information; more precisely, it combines the common ancestors of tokens i and j down to layer ℓ − m of the generative tree. This can be achieved with query and key matrices such that 



W (m)

> Q

⊤

W (m)

> K

has elements equal to zero except in its lower right corner of size ℓ × ℓ which has the following structure: 



β1(ℓ−m−1) ×(ℓ−m−1) 0 0

0 −β 00 0 0

> m×m

 , (20) with β ≫ 1. Let us detail the role of this ℓ × ℓ sub-matrix. Its upper left terms proportional to β will be relevant in the softmax, when β ≫ 1, if they are positive, meaning these are common ancestors to tokens i and j, and negligible if they are negative. The diagonal term proportional to −β

requires the two considered tokens to be in different posi-tions in the sequence to contribute to the softmax, ensuring there is no influence of the messages on themselves in the following steps. Its lower right corner, which is populated by a m×m matrix of zeros, ensures that layers below ℓ−m

in the generative tree are no longer considered. On the other hand, the value matrix may be used to select the correct messages in the token vector, with zeros else-where. As a result, the total operation amounts to averaging the message incoming from the complementary sub-tree over all the trajectories within the complementary sub-tree 

selfattention( x(m); W (m) 

> Q

, W (m) 

> K

, W (m) 

> V

)i ≈≈



0

...

Ej∈S (m)

> i

h

m(m)

> j

i

...

0



=



0

...

m(m)

> i

...

0



, (21) where S(m) 

> i

is the set of tokens belonging to the comple-mentary tree of token i at layer ℓ − m of the generative tree. Note that in principle it is not necessary to average since all of the paths should lead to the same message from the complementary tree, however keep in mind that in prac-tice some tokens will be masked. The averaging procedure therefore allows recovering the information (unless all of the tokens in S(l) 

> i

happen to be masked). Thanks to the skip connections, this contribution is added to the initial token, populating the initially empty entries of these com-plementary messages while leaving the rest of the tokens unaffected. 

Fully connected feedforward layer. Following the ini-tialization and after the attention layer, the encoded token has the correct structure of equation 17. One must now up-date the relevant information in order to go to the next at-tention layer and therefore the next layer in the generative tree. More precisely, we need to: • Compute the messages of the m + 1 th ancestor, • Update the quantities needed to compute the marginal for the leaf associated with the token considered, • Remove temporary or unwanted quantities stemming from the previous steps. All of these must be done with an identical operation for all tokens as the feedforward layer is applied independently for all positions in the sequence. The first part is to update the messages following the equiv-alent of equation 6, 



m(m+1) 

> i



> a

∝ X

> bc

MaPi(b,c )



m(m)

> i



> b



m(m)

> i



> c

, (22) where Pi(b, c ) is either bc or cb depending on the topol-ogy of the factor node at which the update takes place— a piece of information fully contained in ˜pi. This type of operation should be implementable, at least approxi-mately, by a two-layer network since it is known to be a universal approximator. A possible, non-parsimonious 16 How Transformers Learn Structured Data: Insights From Hierarchical Filtering 

way to perform the above update with two-layer fully-connected network with O(q3) neurons is the following. In the first layer, one can readily select the appropriate entries in the embedding vector to output 



m(m)

> i

2

> b

,



m(m)

> i

2

> c

and 

 

m(m)

> i



> b

+



m(m)

> i



> c

2

for all pairs (b, c ). Then, for each transition MaPi(b,c ) the argument of the sum in equation 22 can be obtained as it is equal to 

12 MaPi(b,c )

 

m(m)

> i



> b

+



m(m)

> i



> c

2

−



m(m)

> i

2

> b

−



m(m)

> i

2

> c

!

.

(23) The trace over b and c is then performed by the second layer of the fully-connected block. For each transition, it reads the three corresponding hidden units and multiplies them by the same learned weights 12 MaPi(b,c ) (using the appro-priate positional embedding entry), while the summation is done as usual. In the sparse transition tensors we are con-sidering, this in fact only requires O(q2) hidden units. Note that this exact operation would require squared activations, but can be approximated with a ReLU network by means of a piece-wise linear approximation. Now, we are to compute the actual leaf marginals. As men-tioned in the presentation of the standard BP implementa-tion (Sec. 2.4), the standard approach is to perform both an upwards and downwards pass, which would require 2ℓ

attention layers. Here, we instead wish to perform the computation in ℓ step, as we have seen from experiments that the transformer can achieve perfect accuracy with ℓ attention layers and that it does not appear to use all layers when k < ℓ . To do so, we have included the q2 elements of r(l)1 , . . . , r(l) 

> q

in the token and now show how to update these. Note that if we had 2ℓ

layers, we could instead only store q quantities. As an example, consider the factor graph in Fig. 13 and as-sume the root is not pinned. We can start from the standard BP recursion for the down-going message received by leaf 

i:



ˆm(1) 

> i



> b1

∝ X

> a2,c 1

X

> a3,b 2

X

> a4,c 3



m(3) 

> i



> c3

Ma4a3c3

!

××



m(2) 

> i



> b2

Ma3b2a2

! 

m(1) 

> i



> c1

Ma2b1c1

(24) and define an auxiliary message with a double index depen-dence: 

r(a2,1) 

> b1

= X

> c1



m(1) 

> i



> c1

Ma2b1c1 . (25) In particular, the idea is that we are tracing only over the index of the complement ancestor—which is already avail-able from the first layer—but not on the index of the down-going message, which can only be computed after reaching the top of the hierarchy. Instead, we keep in memory all the separate contributions for each parent index. Then, we can obtain a recursion for the auxiliary messages: 



r(a,m +1) 

> i



> b

∝ X

> h,k

MbPi(h,k )



r(a,m )

> i



> h



m(m)

> i



> k

,

(26) with the base case given in Eq. 25 treated in the transformer first layer. At the last transformer layer, one can also trace over the root index, completing the recursion. Doing so in the final feedforward layer notably yields, at the end of the transformer encoder, 

X

> b



r(a,ℓ )

> i



> b

∝ X

> h,k

X

> b

MbPi(h,k )

!

×



r(a,ℓ −1) 

> i



> h



m(ℓ−1) 

> i

 

> k

,

(27) which is proportional to the incoming message on the leaf and therefore to its marginal if it is to be inferred. The final linear readout may then select this relevant part of the outputted tokens to perform the masked language mod-elling. This requires the embedding of a negative identity operation for each the r and m component, which can still be done with O(q3) hidden units in general ( O(q2) in our sparse case). 

Including intermediate layers. In principle, one could add q × (ℓ − 1) new vectors entries in the token in or-der to store the marginals at intermediate layers. These would simply be used to store the intermediate values of the P

> b



r(a,l )

> i



> b

.

Accommodating for filtration. The implementation de-scribed above considered the case of k = 0 , unfiltered gen-erative trees, i.e. the most complex case from the BP stand-point. In the case of a dataset with filtering parameter k,one can adapt the implementation by taking ℓ − k layers. The central difference then lies in the ℓ − kth block, which must then combine the 2k messages going up to the root in its feedforward layer (instead of two messages like at all other layers in the k = 0 case). 17