Title: Universal Sparse Autoencoders: Interpretable Cross-Model Concept Alignment

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=UoaxRN88oR

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# Universal Sparse Autoencoders: Interpretable Cross-Model Concept Alignment 

Harrish Thasarathan 1 2 Julian Forsyth 1 Thomas Fel 3 Matthew Kowal 1 2 4 5 Konstantinos G. Derpanis 1 6 2 7 

Figure 1. Overview of Universal Sparse Autoencoders. (A) We introduce Universal Sparse Autoencoders (USAEs), a method for discovering common concepts across multiple different deep neural networks. USAEs are simultaneously trained on the activations of multiple models and are constrained to share an aligned and interpretable dictionary of discovered concepts. (B) We also demonstrate one immediate application of USAEs, Coordinated Activation Maximization , where optimizing the inputs of multiple models to activate the same concepts reveals how different models encode the same concept. Visualization reveals interesting concepts at various levels of abstrac-tion, such as ‘curves’ (top), ‘animal haunch’ (middle) and ‘the faces of crowds’ (bottom). Code: github.com/YorkUCVIL/UniversalSAE. 

## Abstract 

We present Universal Sparse Autoencoders (US-AEs), a framework for uncovering and aligning in-terpretable concepts spanning multiple pretrained deep neural networks. Unlike existing concept-based interpretability methods, which focus on a single model, USAEs jointly learn a universal concept space that can reconstruct and interpret the internal activations of multiple models at once. Our core insight is to train a single, overcom-plete sparse autoencoder (SAE) that ingests ac-tivations from any model and decodes them to approximate the activations of any other model under consideration. By optimizing a shared ob-

> 1

York University, Toronto, Canada 2Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada 3Kempner Institute, Harvard University, Boston, USA 

> 4

FAR.AI 5Trajectory Labs, Toronto 6University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada 7Samsung AI Centre, Toronto. Correspondence to: Harrish Thasarathan <harryt@yorku.ca >.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine Learning , Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025 by the author(s). 

jective, the learned dictionary captures common factors of variation— concepts —across different tasks, architectures, and datasets. We show that USAEs discover semantically coherent and im-portant universal concepts across vision models; ranging from low-level features (e.g., colors and textures) to higher-level structures (e.g., parts and objects). Overall, USAEs provide a powerful new method for interpretable cross-model analysis and offers novel applications—such as coordinated activation maximization—that open avenues for deeper insights in multi-model AI systems. 

## 1. Introduction 

In this work, we focus on discovering interpretable concepts shared among multiple pretrained deep neural networks (DNNs). The goal is to learn a universal concept space 

– a joint space of concepts – that provides a unified lens into the hidden representations of diverse models. We de-fine concepts as the abstractions each network captures that transcend individual data points—spanning low-level fea-tures (e.g., colors and textures) to high-level attributes (e.g., 1Universal Sparse Autoencoders: Interpretable Cross-Model Concept Alignment 

emotions like horror and ideas like holidays ). Grasping the underlying representations within DNNs is crucial for mitigating risks during deployment (Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018; Hansson et al., 2021), fostering the de-velopment of innovative model architectures (Kowal et al., 2025; Darcet et al., 2024), and abiding by regulatory frame-works (Commision, 2021; House, 2023). Prior interpretabil-ity efforts often center on dissecting a single model for a specific task, leaving risk management unmanageable when each network is analyzed in isolation. With a growing num-ber of capable DNNs, finding a canonical basis for under-standing model internals may yield more tractable strategies for managing potential risks. Recent work supports this possibility. The core idea behind ‘foundation models’ (Henderson et al., 2023) presupposes that any DNN trained on a large enough dataset should en-code concepts that generalize to an array of downstream tasks for that modality. Moreover, recent work (Moschella et al., 2022) has shown that regardless of architecture, ini-tialization, and task, differently trained models may yield semantically equivalent latent representations, and recent studies (Dravid et al., 2023; Kowal et al., 2024a) even found shared concepts across vision models. This implies that universality may be more widespread than previously as-sumed. However, current techniques for identifying univer-sal features (Dravid et al., 2023; Huh et al., 2024; Kowal et al., 2024a) typically operate post-hoc , extracting concepts from individual models and then matching them through compute-intensive filtering or optimization. This approach is limited in scalability, lacks the efficiencies of gradient-based training, and precludes translation between models within a unified concept space. Consequently, tasks that re-quire simultaneous interaction across multiple models, e.g., 

coordinated activation maximization shown later, become more cumbersome. To overcome these challenges, we introduce a universal sparse autoencoder (USAE), Fig. 1, designed to jointly encode and reconstruct activations from multiple DNNs. Through qualitative and quantitative evaluations, we show that the resulting concept space captures interpretable fea-tures shared across all models. Crucially, a USAE imposes concept alignment during its end-to-end training, differing from conventional post-hoc methods. We apply USAEs to three diverse vision models and make several interesting findings about shared concepts: (i) We discover a broad range of universal concepts , at low and high levels of ab-straction. (ii) We observe a strong correlation between con-cept universality and importance . (iii) We provide quanti-tative and qualitative evidence that DinoV2 (Oquab et al., 2023) admits unique features compared to other considered vision models. (iv) Universal training admits shared repre-sentations not uncovered in model-specific SAE training. 

Contributions. Our main contributions are as follows. First, we introduce USAEs: a framework that learns a shared, in-terpretable concept space spanning multiple models, with focus on visual tasks. Second, we present a detailed anal-ysis contrasting universal concepts against model-specific concepts, offering new insights into how large vision mod-els—trained on diverse tasks and datasets—compare and diverge in their internal representations. Finally, we demon-strate a novel USAE application, coordinated activation maximization , showcasing simultaneous visualization of universal concepts across models. 

## 2. Related work 

Our work introduces a novel concept-based interpretability 

method that adapts SAEs to discover universal concepts . We now review the most relevant works in each of these fields. 

Concept-based interpretability (Kim et al., 2018) emerged as a response to the limitations of attribution methods (Si-monyan et al., 2014; Zeiler & Fergus, 2014; Bach et al., 2015; Springenberg et al., 2014; Smilkov et al., 2017; Sun-dararajan et al., 2017; Selvaraju et al., 2017; Fong et al., 2019; Fel et al., 2021; Muzellec et al., 2024), which, de-spite being widely used for explaining model predictions, often fail to provide a structured or human-interpretable understanding of internal model computations (Hase & Bansal, 2020; Hsieh et al., 2021; Nguyen et al., 2021; Colin et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2022; Sixt et al., 2020). Attri-bution methods highlight input regions responsible for a given prediction, the where , but do not explain what the model has learned at a higher level. In contrast, concept-based approaches aim to decompose internal representa-tions into human-understandable concepts (Genone & Lom-brozo, 2012). The main components of concept-based inter-pretability approaches can generally be broken down into two parts (Fel et al., 2023b): ( i) concept discovery, which ex-tracts and visualizes the interpretable units of computation and ( ii ) concept importance estimation, which quantifies the importance of these units to the model output. Early work explored ‘closed-world’ concept settings in which they evaluated the existence of pre-defined concepts in model neurons (Bau et al., 2017) or layer activations (Kim et al., 2018). When access to an aligned text-image representation space is available, output-level image representations can be decomposed into interpretable components using text representations as a dictionary (Gandelsman et al., 2024). Similar to our work, ‘open-world’ concept discovery meth-ods do not assume the set of concepts is known a priori. These methods pass data through the model and cluster the activations to discover concepts and then apply a concept importance method on these discoveries (Ghorbani et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2021; Fel et al., 2023c; Graziani et al., 2023; Vielhaben et al., 2023; Kowal et al., 2024a;b). 2Universal Sparse Autoencoders: Interpretable Cross-Model Concept Alignment 

Sparse Autoencoders (SAEs) (Cunningham et al., 2023; Bricken et al., 2023; Rajamanoharan et al., 2024; Gao et al., 2024; Menon et al., 2024) are a specific instance of dictio-nary learning (Rubinstein et al., 2010; Elad, 2010; To ˇsi ´c & Frossard, 2011; Mairal et al., 2014; Dumitrescu & Irofti, 2018) that has regained attention (Chen et al., 2021; Tasissa et al., 2023; Baccouche et al., 2012; Tariyal et al., 2016; Papyan et al., 2017; Mahdizadehaghdam et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2023) for its ability to uncover interpretable concepts in DNN activations. This resurgence stems from evidence that individual neurons are often polysemantic —i.e., they activate for multiple, seemingly unrelated concepts (Nguyen et al., 2019; Elhage et al., 2022)—suggesting that deep net-works encode information in superposition (Elhage et al., 2022). SAEs tackle this by learning a sparse (Hurley & Rickard, 2009; Eamaz et al., 2022) and overcomplete rep-resentation, where the number of concepts exceeds the la-tent dimensions of the activation space, encouraging dis-entanglement and interpretability. While SAEs and clus-tering bear mathematical resemblance, SAEs benefit from gradient-based optimization, enabling greater scalability and efficiency in learning structured concepts. Though widely applied in natural language processing (NLP) (Wat-tenberg & Vi ´egas, 2024; Clarke et al., 2024; Chanin et al., 2024; Tamkin et al., 2023), SAEs have also been used in vision (Fel et al., 2023b; Surkov et al., 2024; Bhalla et al., 2024a). Early work compared SAEs to clustering and ana-lyzed early layers of Inception v1 (Mordvintsev et al., 2015; Gorton, 2024), revealing hypothesized but hidden features. More recently, SAEs have been leveraged to construct text-based concept bottleneck models (Koh et al., 2020) from CLIP representations (Radford et al., 2021; Rao et al., 2024; Parekh et al., 2024; Bhalla et al., 2024b), showcasing their versatility across modalities. Unlike prior work that apply SAEs independently to models, here we consider a joint ap-plication of SAEs fit simultaneously across diverse models. 

Feature Universality studies the shared information across different DNNs. One approach, Representational alignment, quantifies the mutual information between different sets of representations—whether across models or between bi-ological and artificial systems (Kriegeskorte et al., 2008; Sucholutsky et al., 2023). Typically, these methods rely on paired data (e.g., text-image pairs) to compare encod-ings across modalities. Recent work suggests that founda-tion models, regardless of their training modality, may be converging toward a shared, Platonic representation of the world (Huh et al., 2024). Another line of research focuses on identifying universal features across models trained on different tasks. Rosetta Neurons (Dravid et al., 2023) iden-tify image regions with correlated activations across models, while Rosetta Concepts (Kowal et al., 2024a) extract con-cept vectors from video transformers by analyzing shared exemplars. These methods perform post-hoc mining of uni-…

> Vision
> encoder Vision encoder

Universal SAE                 

> Shared Dataset
> f(j)̂A(j)A(i)
> D(j)
> f(i)
> Ψ(i)
> θ
> Z3
> Zm
> (X)
> Figure 2. USAE training process. In each forward pass during training, an encoder of model iis randomly selected to encode a batch of that model’s activations, Z=Ψ(i)
> θ(A(i)). The concept space, Z, is then decoded to reconstruct every model’s activations,
> bA(j), using their respective decoders, D(j).

versal concepts rather than learning a shared conceptual space. This reliance on retrospective discovery is compu-tationally prohibitive for many models and prevents direct concept translation between architectures. A concurrent study (Lindsey et al., 2024) explores training SAEs (termed 

crosscoders ) between different states of the same model before and after fine-tuning. In contrast, our work discovers universal concepts shared across distinct model architec-tures for vision tasks. 

## 3. Method 

Notations. Let ∥·∥ 2 and ∥·∥ F denote the ℓ2 and Frobenius norms, respectively, and set [n] = {1, . . . , n }. We focus on a broad representation learning paradigm, where a DNN, 

f : X → A , maps data from X into a feature space, A ⊆ 

Rd. Given a dataset, X ⊆ X of size n, these activations are collated into a matrix A ∈ Rn×d. Each row Ai (for i ∈ [n])corresponds to the feature vector of the i-th sample. 

Background. The main goal of a Sparse Autoencoder (SAE) is to find a sparse re-interpretation of the feature representations. Concretely, given a set of n inputs, X (e.g., images or text) and their encoding, A = f (X) ∈ Rn×d, an SAE learns an encoder Ψθ (·) that maps A to codes Z =

Ψθ (A) ∈ Rn×m, forming a sparse representation. This sparse representation must still allow faithful reconstruction of A through a learned dictionary (decoder) D ∈ Rm×d,i.e., ZD must be close to A. If m > d , we say D is 

overcomplete . In this work, we specifically consider an (overcomplete) TopK SAE (Gao et al., 2024), defined as 

Z = Ψθ (A) = TopK  Wenc (A − bpre ), ˆA = ZD , (1) where Wenc ∈ Rm×d and bpre ∈ Rd are learnable weights. The TopK( ·) operator enforces ∥Zi∥0 ≤ K for all i ∈ [m].The final training loss is given by the Frobenius norm of the 3Universal Sparse Autoencoders: Interpretable Cross-Model Concept Alignment 

reconstruction error: 

LSAE = ∥f (X) − Ψθ

 f (X)D∥F = ∥A − ZD ∥F , (2) with the K-sparsity constraint applied to the rows of Z.

3.1. Universal Sparse Autoencoders (USAEs) 

Contrasting standard SAEs, which reinterpret the internal representations of a single model, universal sparse autoen-coders (USAEs) extend this notion across M different mod-els, each with its own feature dimension, di (see Fig. 2). Concretely, for model i ∈ [M ], let A(i) ∈ Rn×di denote the matrix of activations for n samples. The key insight of USAEs is to learn a shared sparse code, Z ∈ Rn×m, which allows every model to be reconstructed from the same sparse embedding. Specifically, each activation from model i in 

A(i) is encoded via a model-specific encoder Ψ(i) 

> θ

, as 

Z = Ψ(i) 

> θ

(A(i)) = TopK  W (i) 

> enc

(A(i) − b(i)

> pre

). (3) Crucially, once encoded into Z, each row of any model 

j ∈ [M ] can be reconstructed by a model-specific dictionary, 

D(j) ∈ Rdj ×m, as 

bA(j) = ZD (j). (4) By jointly learning all encoder-decoder pairs, 

{(Ψ(i) 

> θ

, D(i))}Mi=1 , the USAE enforces a unified con-cept space, Z, that aligns the internal representations of all 

M models. This shared code not only promotes consistency and interpretability across model architectures, but also ensures each model’s features can be faithfully recovered from a common set of sparse ‘concepts’. 

3.2. Training USAEs 

Recall that X ⊆ X is our dataset of size n, mapped into their respective feature space using DNNs f (1) , . . . , f (M ).A naive approach to train our respective encoder and decoder would simultaneously encode and decode the features of all 

M models, which quickly grows expensive in memory and computation. Conversely, randomly sampling a pair of models to encode and decode results in slow convergence. To balance these concerns, we adopt an intermediate strategy (pseudocode detailed in Figure 3) that updates a single encoder-decoder pair at each iteration with a reconstruction loss computed through all decoders. Concretely, at each mini-batch it-eration, a single model i ∈ [M ] is selected at random, and a batch of features, A(i) ∈ Rn×di , is sampled and encoded into the shared code space, Z = Ψ(i) 

> θ

(A(i)). This code space, Z, is then used to reconstruct the feature rep-resentation A(j) of every model j ∈ [M ] via its decoder: 

bA(j) = ZD (j), where D(j) is the model-j decoder. All reconstructions are aggregated to form the total loss:                                      

> def train_usae( Ψθ,D,A,T, Optimizers): M = len (Ψθ)
> for tin range (T): i = random(M)
> Z=Ψ(i)
> θ(A(i))
> L=0.0
> for jin range (M):
> bA(j)=Z@D(j)
> L+= ( A(j)-bA(j)).norm(p=’fro’)
> L.backward() Optimizers[i].step()
> return Ψθ,D
> Figure 3. Training Universal Sparse Autoencoder. During each training iteration, LUniversal is the aggregated error computed from decoding each activation bA(j). We then take an optimizer step for randomly selected encoder Ψ(i)
> θand associated dictionary D(i).

LUniversal =

> M

X

> j=1

∥A(j) − bA(j)∥F (5) 

=

> M

X

> j=1

∥A(j) − Ψθ (A(i))D(j)∥F . (6) Using this universal loss, backpropagation updates the cho-sen encoder Ψ(i) 

> θ

and decoder D(i). This method promotes concept alignment, ensures an equal number of updates be-tween encoders and decoders, and strikes a practical balance between training speed and memory usage. 

3.3. Application: Coordinated Activation Maximization 

A common technique for interpreting individual neurons or latent dimensions in deep networks is Activation Maxi-mization (AM) (Olah et al., 2017; Tsipras et al., 2019; San-turkar et al., 2019; Engstrom et al., 2019; Ghiasi et al., 2021; 2022; Fel et al., 2023a; Hamblin et al., 2024). AM involves synthesizing an input that maximally activates a specific component of a model—such as a neuron, channel, or con-cept vector (Williams, 1986; Mahendran & Vedaldi, 2015; Kim et al., 2018; Fel et al., 2023c). However, in the case of a USAE, the learned latent space is explicitly structured to capture shared concepts across multiple models. This shared space enables a novel extension of AM: Coordinated Activation Maximization , where a common concept index, 

k, is simultaneously maximized across all aligned models. Given M models, our objective is to optimize one input per model, x(1)  

> ⋆

, . . . , x(M ) 

> ⋆

, ensuring that all inputs maximally activate the same concept dimension k. This approach en-ables the visualization of how a single concept manifests across different models. By comparing these optimized inputs, we can identify both consistent and divergent repre-sentations of the same underlying concept. Let x(i) denote 4Universal Sparse Autoencoders: Interpretable Cross-Model Concept Alignment Input Dino SigLIP ViT Input Dino SigLIP ViT   

> Concept 3152 - Yellow
> Concept 4235 - Blue
> Concept 4226 - Bird Background
> Concept 3859 - Thin Objects Concept 2824 - Bolts
> Concept 5611 - Dog Face Concept 972 - Animal Jaw
> Concept 1935 - Animal Group Faces

Figure 4. Qualitative results of universal concepts. We discover and visualize heatmaps of universal concepts across a broad range of visual abstractions, where bright green denotes a stronger activation of a given concept. We observe colors, basic shapes, foreground-background, parts, objects and their groupings across all considered models .

the input to model i, and let f (i)(x(i)) ∈ Rdi represent its internal activations. Each model is associated with a USAE encoder Ψ(i) 

> θ

, which maps activations to the shared concept space. The activation of concept k for model i given input 

x(i) is defined as 

Z(i) 

> k

(x) = 

h

Ψ(i)

> θ



f (i)(x)

i 

> k

, (7) where k indexes the universal concept dimension in the USAE. The goal is to independently optimize each x(i)

such that it maximizes the activation of the same concept k

across all M models: 

x(i) 

> ⋆

= arg max 

> x∈X

Z(i) 

> k

(x(i)) − λR(x(i)), (8) where R(x) is a regularizer that promotes natural and in-terpretable inputs (e.g., total variation, ℓ2 penalty, or data priors), and λ controls its strength. In all experiments, we follow the optimization and regularization strategy of Maco (Fel et al., 2023a), which optimizes the input phase while preserving its magnitude. Once the optimized inputs 

x(i) 

> ⋆

are obtained for each model, they reveal the specific structures or features (e.g., model- or task-specific biases) that model i associates with this universal concept. 

## 4. Experimental Results 

This section is split into six parts. We first provide ex-perimental implementation details. Then, we qualitatively analyze universal concepts discovered by USAEs (Sec. 4.1). Next, we provide a quantitative analysis of USAEs through the validation of activation reconstruction (Sec. 4.2), measur-ing the universality and importance of concepts (Secs. 4.3), and investigating the consistency between concepts in US-AEs and individually trained SAE counterparts (Sec. 4.4). Finally, we provide a finer-grained analysis via the appli-cation of USAEs to coordinated activation maximization 

(Sec. 4.5). 

Implementation Details. We train a USAE on the fi-nal layer activations of three popular vision models: Di-noV2 (Oquab et al., 2023; Darcet et al., 2024), SigLIP (Zhai et al., 2023), and ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) (trained on ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009)). These models, sourced from the timm library (Wightman, 2019), were selected due to their diverse training paradigms—image and patch-level discriminative learning (DinoV2), image-text contrastive learning (SigLIP), and supervised classification (ViT). For all experiments, we train the USAE on the ImageNet train-ing set, while the validation set is reserved for qualitative visualizations and quantitative evaluations. Our USAE is 5Universal Sparse Autoencoders: Interpretable Cross-Model Concept Alignment SigLIP DinoV2 ViT Decoder and Activations j used for reconstruction       

> SigLIP
> DinoV2
> ViT Model Activations  i Encoded to  Z
> 0.61 0.36 0.25 0.31 0.77 0.31 0.30 0.45 0.59
> Reconstruction Matrix ( R2-score)
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0

Figure 5. Cross model activation reconstruction. Each entry 

(i, j ) represents the average R2 score when activations A(i) from model i are encoded into the shared code space, Z, then decoded via D(j) to reconstruct bA(j). Positive off-diagonal R2 scores indicate the presence of shared features across models captured by USAEs. 

trained on the final layer representations of each vision model, as previous work showed final-layer features facil-itate improved concept extraction and yield accurate esti-mates of feature importance (Fel et al., 2023b). We base our SAE off of the TopK Sparse Autoencoder (SAE) (Gao et al., 2024) and for all experiments, use a dictionary of size 

6144 . We train all USAEs on a single Nvidia RTX 6000 GPU, with training completing in approximately three days (see Appendix A.1 for more implementation details). 

4.1. Universal Concept Visualizations 

We qualitatively validate the most important universal con-cepts found by USAEs. We determine concept impor-tance by measuring its relative energy towards reconstruc-tion (Gillis, 2020), where the energy of a concept k is de-fined as Energy (k) = ∥Ex[Zk(x)] Dk∥22. (9) This measures how much each concept contributes to re-constructing the original features – formally, the squared ℓ2

norm of the average activation of a concept multiplied by its dictionary element. Higher energy concepts have a greater impact on the reconstruction. Figure 4 presents eight representative concepts selected from the 100 most important USAE concepts. These con-cepts span a diverse range of ImageNet categories, demon-strating the ability of USAEs to capture meaningful features across multiple levels of abstraction and complexity (Olah et al., 2017; Fel et al., 2024). At lower levels, the USAE extracts fundamental color concepts, such as ‘yellow’ and ‘blue’, activating over broad spatial regions across multiple classes. Notably, the blue bottle caps example highlights a precisely captured checkerboard pattern, demonstrating spatial precision. At intermediate levels, the USAE uncov-ers structural relationships consistent across models, such as foreground-background contrasts (e.g., birds against the sky) and thin, wiry objects, independent of model archi-tecture. At higher levels, it identifies object-part concepts, like ‘dog face’, excluding eye regions, and ‘bolts’, which activate across materials like metal and rubber. Finally, the 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Normalized Firing Entropy ( Hk)     

> 0
> 500
> 1000
> 1500 Number of Concepts  (a)
> Distribution of Firing Entropy
> Maximum Entropy 0200 400 600 800 1000 Top 1000 Concepts by Energy (Proportion Sorted)
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8 Co-firing Proportion  (b)
> SigLIP: 0.344 DinoV2: 0.266 ViT: 0.326 Overall: 0.312
> Co-firing Proportions for Top Energy-Ranked Concepts
> SigLIP
> DinoV2
> ViT
> Mean

Figure 6. Quantitative analysis of universality and importance of USAE concepts via co-firing rates. (a) Histogram of firing en-tropy across all k concepts. We observe a bimodal distribution over firing entropy with peaks at Hk = 1 and Hk = 0 .6, demonstrating a group of concepts that fire uniformly across models and a group that preferentially activates for some models. (b) Proportion of con-cept co-fires for the top 1000 energetic concepts per model. The first 200 concepts co-fire between 60 − 80% of the time suggest-ing high universality. (c) Relationship between concept co-firing frequency and concept energy. We show all concepts (left) and only frequently co-firing concepts (≥ 1000 co-fires ) (right). The correlation strengthens ( r = 0 .63 vs r = 0 .89 ) when focusing on high-frequency concepts, suggesting a strong correlation between how energetic a concept is and its universality. 

USAE reveals fine-grained, compositional concepts such as ‘mouth-open animal jaws’ and ‘faces of animals in a group’, which generalize across ImageNet classes and persist even in ViT, despite its lack of explicit structured supervision. Overall, these findings show that USAEs discover robust, generalizable concepts that persist across different archi-tectures, training tasks, and datasets. This highlights their ability to reveal invariant, semantically meaningful repre-sentations that transcend the specifics of any single model. 

4.2. Validation of Cross-Model Reconstruction 

A viable universal space of concepts should enable the re-construction of activations from any model. To quantify the reconstruction performance, we use the coefficient of determination, or R2 score (Wright, 1921), which measures the proportion of variance in the original activations that is captured by the reconstructed activations, relative to the mean activation baseline, ¯A. The R2 score is defined as 

R2 = 1 − ∥ A − bA∥2 

> F

/∥A − ¯A∥2 

> F

, (10) where || A − bA|| 2 

> F

represents the residual sum of squares (the reconstruction error), and || A − ¯A|| 2 

> F

is the total sum of squares (the variance of the original activations relative to their mean). A higher R2 indicates better reconstruction quality, with a score of one for a perfect reconstruction. 6Universal Sparse Autoencoders: Interpretable Cross-Model Concept Alignment 

Figure 5 shows the R2 scores as a confusion matrix across all three models. As expected, self-reconstruction along the diagonal achieves the highest explained variance, confirm-ing the USAE’s effectiveness when encoding and decoding within the same model. More notably, positive off-diagonal 

R2 scores indicate successful cross-model reconstruction, suggesting the USAE captures shared, likely universal, fea-tures. DinoV2 exhibits the highest self-reconstruction per-formance, aligning with individual SAE results where its 

R2 score averages 0.8, compared to 0.7 for SigLIP and ViT. This suggests DinoV2 features are sparser and more decom-posable, a trend further supported in Secs. 4.3 and 4.5. 

4.3. Measuring Concept Universality and Importance 

Having established the efficacy of cross-model reconstruc-tion, we now assess concept universality using firing en-tropy and co-firing metrics. We further examine the relation-ship between universality and importance in reconstructing ground truth activations. Let τ be a threshold value and V be the ImageNet validation set of patches. Given data points x ∈ V , let Z(i)(x) = 

Ψ(i) 

> θ

(f (i)(x)) denote the sparse code from model i ∈ [M ].We define a concept firing for dimension k when Z(i) 

> k

(x) >τ . A co-fire occurs when a concept fires simultaneously across all models for the same input. Formally, for concept dimension k, the set of co-fires is defined as 

Ck = {x ∈ V : min   

> i∈[M]

Z(i) 

> k

(x) > τ }. (11) Similarly, let F(i) 

> k

= {x ∈ V : Z(i) 

> k

(x) > τ } denote the set of “fires” for model i and concept k. We are now ready to introduce our two metrics ( i) Firing Entropy ( FE ) and ( ii )Co-Fire Proportion ( CFP ). 

Firing Entropy (FE) measures, for each concept k, the normalized entropy across models, as 

FE k = − 1log M

> M

X

> i=1

p(i) 

> k

log p(i) 

> k

, (12) where 

p(i) 

> k

= |F (i) 

> k

|/

> M

X

> j=1

|F (j) 

> k

|. (13) The normalization ensures FE k ∈ [0 , 1] , with FE = 1 indi-cating a shared concept with uniform firing across models and low entropy indicating that a concept has a model bias and fires for a single architecture or subset. Figure 6 (a) shows a histogram of firing entropies across all concept dimensions K. Fully universal concepts should have a maximum entropy of one, indicating uniform firing across models. Our results exhibit a bimodal distribution, with over 1000 concepts at peak entropy, confirming the USAE learns a strongly universal concept space. A second group shows moderate entropy, indicating concepts that fa-0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

> Cosine Similarity Threshold
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Fraction of Concepts > CS Threshold  Concept Matches Across Cosine Similarity Thresholds
> SigLIP
> DinoV2
> ViT
> Rand. Baseline

Model AUC % Z > 0.5 SigLIP 0.30 0.23 DinoV2 0.36 0.26 ViT 0.41 0.38 Baseline 0.13 0.00 

Figure 7. Concept consistency between independent SAEs and Universal SAEs. (left) Our universal training objective discov-ers concepts that have overlap (i.e., cosine similarity) with those discovered with independent training. Specifically, ViT has notice-ably more overlap, suggesting its simpler architecture and training objective may yield activations that naturally encode universal visual concepts. (right) We consider a cosine similarity (CS) > 0.5

as a match between concepts in the SAE and USAE learned dictio-naries. Across each vision model used in training, the Area Under the Curve (AUC) suggests 23 − 37% of the universal concepts Z

discovered by our approach exist in independently trained SAEs. 

vor two models but not all three. Few concepts fall in the low-entropy range (0.0–0.2), suggesting most are shared rather than model-specific. Appendix A.2 further examines these low-entropy concepts, revealing DinoV2’s unique en-coding of geometric features as well as SigLIP’s encoding of textual features. 

Co-Fire Proportion (CFP) quantifies how often concepts fire together for the same input. While previous results show many concepts fire uniformly across models, they do not reveal how frequently they co-fire on the same tokens. For each model i and concept k, we compute the proportion of total fires that are also co-fires: 

CFP (i) 

> k

= |C k|/|F (i) 

> k

|. (14) High co-fire proportions indicate concepts that are more universal, i.e., when one model detects the concept, others tend to as well. Figure 6 (b) shows the CFP for the top 1000 concepts per model. The first ∼100 concepts exhibit high co-firing 

(> 0.5) , activating together 50–80% of the time, indicating a core set of consistently recognized concepts across net-works. The gradual decline in CFP suggests a spectrum of universality, from widely shared to model-specific. For our chosen models, we again notice a pattern distinguish-ing DinoV2, which has a lower co-firing proportion (0.266) compared to SigLIP (0.344) and ViT (0.326), suggesting the latter two share more concepts. This may stem from DinoV2’s architecture and distillation-based training, which enhance its adaptability to diverse vision tasks (Amir et al., 2022). These findings also hint at a correlation between co-firing and concept importance, raising the question: How important are these highly co-firing features? 7Universal Sparse Autoencoders: Interpretable Cross-Model Concept Alignment   

> Figure 8. Coordinated Activation Maximization. We show results for the three model USAE along with dataset exemplars, where bright green denotes stronger activation of the concept. We visualize the maximally activating input for a broad range of concepts, including basic shape compositions, textures, and various objects.

To answer this, we plot the co-fire frequency of all concepts as well as their energy-based importance in Fig. 6 (c). We see a moderate positive correlation r = 0 .63 , slope = 0 .23 ;however, zooming into concepts with > 1000 co-fires, shows a much stronger correlation. Indeed, past a certain threshold, co-firing frequency becomes highly predictable of concept importance. This suggests that the most impor-tant concept are also highly universal , firing consistently across models. 

4.4. Concept Consistency Between USAEs and SAEs 

How many concepts discovered under our universal training regime are present in an independently trained SAE for a single model? Further, what percentage of highly universal concepts appear in these same independently trained SAEs? To assess the alignment between independently-trained and universal SAEs, we analyze the similarity of their learned conceptual spaces. We quantify concept overlap by com-puting pairwise cosine similarities between decoder vectors and use the Hungarian algorithm (Kuhn, 1955) to optimally align concepts, measuring consistency across models. Figure 7 presents concept consistency distributions across models. For a baseline to compare against, we sample con-cept vectors from normal distributions, where the mean and variance are those of each independent model’s dictionary. We observe that ViT has the strongest concept overlap with 

38% of its concepts having a cosine similarity > 0.5 with its independent counterpart. This suggests ViT’s conceptual representation under the independent SAE objective is most well preserved under universal training. USAEs achieve far better performance than the baseline (Area Under the Curve (AUC)= 0.13 ) across models, suggesting that univer-sal training preserves meaningful concept alignments rather than learn entirely new representations. On the other hand the relatively low proportion of overlap ( 23% and 26% for SigLIP and DinoV2, respectively) for concepts indicates that universal training discovers concepts that may not emerge in independent training .When looking at the top 1,000 co-firing concepts (see Sec. A.5.1) we find an overall increase in consistency be-tween individual and universal concepts: the most universal (highest co-firing) concepts are more likely to be found in each model’s respective independently trained SAE. Uni-versal training naturally selects for concepts that are well-represented across all models, since these will better mini-mize the total reconstruction loss, biasing towards discover-ing fundamental visual concepts that all models have learned to represent. Independently trained SAEs have no such se-lection pressure, learning to represent any concept that helps reconstruction, including architecture or objective specific concepts that are not universal. 

4.5. Coordinated Activation Maximization 

Figure 8 shows a visual comparison of several universal concepts and their corresponding coordinated activation maximization inputs. Our method produces interpretable vi-sualizations for a given USAE dimension across all models for a broad range of visual concepts. We show examples of all models encoding low-level visual primitives, e.g., ‘curves’ and ‘crosses’. Other basic entities are also shown, like ‘brown grass’ texture and ‘round objects’. Finally, we visualize higher-level concepts corresponding to ‘objects from above’ and ‘keypads’. In all cases, our coordinated activation maximization method produces plausible visual phenomenon that can be used to identify differences between how each model encodes the same concept .For example, we note an interesting difference between DinoV2 and the other models: low-mid level concepts (i.e., left two columns) appear at a much larger scale than the other models. Further, as shown in Fig. 1, DinoV2 exhibits stronger activation for the ‘curves’ concept, particularly for larger curves, compared to the other models. Additionally, 8Universal Sparse Autoencoders: Interpretable Cross-Model Concept Alignment   

> Figure 9. DinoV2 low-entropy concepts. We show examples of low-entropy concepts that fire solely for DinoV2. These concepts fire for perspective cues related to view invariance such as converging perspective lines (concept 3715 and 4189) and angled scenes (concept 2562 and 3003).

while ‘brown grass’ activates on grass in our heatmaps, some models’ activation maximizations include birds, suggesting animals also influence the concept’s activation. 

4.6. Discovering Unique Concepts with USAEs 

Our universal training objective provides us the opportu-nity to explore concepts that may arise independently in one model, but not in others. Using metrics for universal-ity, Eqs. 13 and 12, we can search for concepts that fire with a low entropy , thereby isolating firing distributions whose probability mass is allocated to a single model. We explore this direction by isolating unique concepts for Di-noV2 and SigLIP, both of which have been studied for their unique generalization capabilities to different downstream tasks (Amir et al., 2022; Zhai et al., 2023). 4.6.1. U NIQUE DINO V2 C ONCEPTS 

DinoV2’s unique concepts are presented in Figures 9 and 10. Interestingly, we find concepts that solely fire for DinoV2 related to perspective and depth cues. These fea-tures follow surfaces and edges to vanishing points as in concept 3715 and 4189, demonstrating features for converg-ing perspective lines. Further, in Figure 10 we find features for object groupings placed in the scene at varying depths in concept 4756, and background depth cues related to uphill slanted surfaces in concept 1710. We also find features that suggest a representation of view invariance, such as con-cepts related to the angle or tilt of an image (Fig. 9) for both left (concept 3003) and right views (concept 2562). Lastly, we observe unique geometric features in Fig. 11 that suggest some low-level 3D understanding, such as concept 4191 that fires for the top face of rectangular prisms, concept 3448 for brim lines that belong to dome shaped objects, as well as concept 1530 for corners of objects resembling rectangular prisms. View invariance, depth cues, and low-level geometric con-cepts are all features we expect to observe unique to Di-noV2’s training regime and architecture (Oquab et al., 2023). Specifically, self-distillation across different views and crops at the image level emphasizes geometric con-sistency across viewpoints. This, in combination with the masked image modelling iBOT objective (Zhou et al., 2021) that learns to predict masked tokens in a student-teacher distillation framework, would explain the sensitivity of Di-noV2 to perspective and geometric properties, as well as view-invariant features. We further explore unique concepts in SigLIP using this same approach in A.3 finding concepts that fire for both visual and textual elements of the same concept. 

## 5. Conclusion 

In this work, we introduced Universal Sparse Autoencoders 

(USAEs), a framework for learning a unified concept space that faithfully reconstructs and interprets activations from multiple deep vision models at once. Our experiments re-vealed several important findings: (i) qualitatively, we dis-cover diverse concepts, from low-level primitives like col-ors, shapes and textures, to compositional, semantic, and abstract concepts like groupings, object parts, and faces, (ii) many concepts turn out to be both universal (firing consis-tently across different architectures and training objectives) and highly important (responsible for a large proportion of each model’s reconstruction), (iii) certain models, such as DinoV2, encode unique features even as they share much of their conceptual basis with others, and (iv) while univer-sal training recovers a significant fraction of the concepts learned by independent single-model SAEs, it also uncovers new shared representations that do not appear to emerge in model-specific training. Finally, we demonstrated a novel application of USAEs— coordinated activation maximiza-tion —that enables simultaneous visualization of a universal concept across multiple networks. Altogether, our USAE framework offers a practical and powerful tool for multi-model interpretability, shedding light on the commonalities and distinctions that arise when different architectures, tasks, and datasets converge on shared high-level abstractions. 9Universal Sparse Autoencoders: Interpretable Cross-Model Concept Alignment 

## Impact Statement 

This work advances interpretability for machine learning systems. More specifically, understanding shared represen-tations across deep neural networks (DNNs) is essential for scalable interpretability, enabling more effective risk miti-gation, robust model design, and compliance with evolving regulations. By moving beyond single-model analysis, we aim to help establish a unified framework for interpreting diverse architectures, fostering transparency and account-ability in AI deployment. 

## Acknowledgements 

This work was completed with support from the Vector In-stitute, and was funded in part by the Canada First Research Excellence Fund (CFREF) for the Vision: Science to Appli-cations (VISTA) program (K.G.D, H.T), the NSERC Discov-ery Grant program (K.G.D), the NSERC Canada Graduate Scholarship Doctoral program (M.K), the Ontario Graduate Scholarship (H.T), and a gift from the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative Foundation to establish the Kempner Institute for the Study of Natural and Artificial Intelligence at Harvard University (T.F). 

## References 

Amir, S., Gandelsman, Y., Bagon, S., and Dekel, T. Deep ViT Features as Dense Visual Descriptors. Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision Workshops 

, 2022. Baccouche, M., Mamalet, F., Wolf, C., Garcia, C., and Baskurt, A. Spatio-temporal convolutional sparse auto-encoder for sequence classification. In Proceedings of the British Machine Vision Conference , 2012. Bach, S., Binder, A., Montavon, G., Klauschen, F., M ¨uller, K.-R., and Samek, W. On pixel-wise explanations for non-linear classifier decisions by layer-wise relevance propagation. PloS one , 10(7), 2015. Bau, D., Zhou, B., Khosla, A., Oliva, A., and Torralba, A. Network dissection: Quantifying interpretability of deep visual representations. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2017. Bhalla, U., Oesterling, A., Srinivas, S., Calmon, F. P., and Lakkaraju, H. Interpreting CLIP with sparse linear con-cept embeddings (splice). Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems , 2024a. Bhalla, U., Srinivas, S., Ghandeharioun, A., and Lakkaraju, H. Towards unifying interpretability and control: Evalua-tion via intervention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.04430 ,2024b. Bricken, T., Templeton, A., Batson, J., Chen, B., Jermyn, A., Conerly, T., Turner, N., Anil, C., Denison, C., Askell, A., Lasenby, R., Wu, Y., Kravec, S., Schiefer, N., Maxwell, T., Joseph, N., Hatfield-Dodds, Z., Tamkin, A., Nguyen, K., McLean, B., Burke, J. E., Hume, T., Carter, S., Henighan, T., and Olah, C. Towards monosemanticity: Decomposing language models with dictionary learning. 

Transformer Circuits Thread , 2023. https://transformer-circuits.pub/2023/monosemantic-features/index.html. Buolamwini, J. and Gebru, T. Gender shades: Intersectional accuracy disparities in commercial gender classification. In Conference on Fairness, Accountability and Trans-parency , 2018. Chanin, D., Wilken-Smith, J., Dulka, T., Bhatnagar, H., and Bloom, J. A is for absorption: Studying feature splitting and absorption in sparse autoencoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.14507 , 2024. Chen, J., Mao, H., Wang, Z., and Zhang, X. Low-rank representation with adaptive dictionary learning for sub-space clustering. Knowledge-Based Systems , 223:107053, 2021. Cimpoi, M., Maji, S., Kokkinos, I., Mohamed, S., , and Vedaldi, A. Describing textures in the wild. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2014. Clarke, M., Bhatnagar, H., and Bloom, J. Compositionality and ambiguity: Latent co-occurrence and interpretable subspaces, 2024. https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/WNoqEivcCSg8gJe5h/ compositionality-and-ambiguity-latent-co-occurrence-and. Colin, J., Fel, T., Cad `ene, R., and Serre, T. What I cannot predict, I do not understand: A human-centered evalua-tion framework for explainability methods. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2021. Commision, E. Laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence (artificial intelligence act) and amending cer-tain union legislative acts. European Commision , 2021. Cunningham, H., Ewart, A., Riggs, L., Huben, R., and Sharkey, L. Sparse autoencoders find highly inter-pretable features in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08600 , 2023. Darcet, T., Oquab, M., Mairal, J., and Bojanowski, P. Vision transformers need registers. Proceedings of the Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. Deng, J., Dong, W., Socher, R., Li, L.-J., Li, K., and Fei-Fei, L. ImageNet: A large-scale hierarchical image database. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2009. 10 Universal Sparse Autoencoders: Interpretable Cross-Model Concept Alignment 

Dosovitskiy, A., Beyer, L., Kolesnikov, A., Weissenborn, D., Zhai, X., Unterthiner, T., Dehghani, M., Minderer, M., Heigold, G., Gelly, S., et al. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations ,2020. Dravid, A., Gandelsman, Y., Efros, A. A., and Shocher, A. Rosetta neurons: Mining the common units in a model zoo. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Con-ference on Computer Vision , 2023. Dumitrescu, B. and Irofti, P. Dictionary learning algorithms and applications . Springer, 2018. Eamaz, A., Yeganegi, F., and Soltanalian, M. On the build-ing blocks of sparsity measures. IEEE Signal Processing Letters , 29:2667–2671, 2022. Elad, M. Sparse and redundant representations: From theory to applications in signal and image processing .Springer Science & Business Media, 2010. Elhage, N., Hume, T., Olsson, C., Schiefer, N., Henighan, T., Kravec, S., Hatfield-Dodds, Z., Lasenby, R., Drain, D., Chen, C., Grosse, R., McCandlish, S., Kaplan, J., Amodei, D., Wattenberg, M., and Olah, C. Toy models of superposition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.10652 , 2022. Engstrom, L., Ilyas, A., Santurkar, S., Tsipras, D., Tran, B., and Madry, A. Adversarial robustness as a prior for learned representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.00945 , 2019. Fel, T., Cadene, R., Chalvidal, M., Cord, M., Vigouroux, D., and Serre, T. Look at the variance! Efficient black-box explanations with sobol-based sensitivity analysis. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,2021. Fel, T., Boissin, T., Boutin, V., Picard, A., Novello, P., Colin, J., Linsley, D., Rousseau, T., Cad `ene, R., Goetschalckx, L., Gardes, L., and Serre, T. Unlocking feature visual-ization for deeper networks with magnitude constrained optimization. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 2023a. Fel, T., Boutin, V., Moayeri, M., Cad `ene, R., Bethune, L., Chalvidal, M., and Serre, T. A holistic approach to unify-ing automatic concept extraction and concept importance estimation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023b. Fel, T., Picard, A., Bethune, L., Boissin, T., Vigouroux, D., Colin, J., Cad `ene, R., and Serre, T. CRAFT: Concept recursive activation factorization for explainability. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2023c. Fel, T., Bethune, L., Lampinen, A. K., Serre, T., and Her-mann, K. Understanding visual feature reliance through the lens of complexity. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. Fong, R., Patrick, M., and Vedaldi, A. Understanding deep networks via extremal perturbations and smooth masks. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision , 2019. Gandelsman, Y., Efros, A. A., and Steinhardt, J. Interpreting CLIP’s image representation via text-based decomposi-tion. Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. Gao, L., la Tour, T. D., Tillman, H., Goh, G., Troll, R., Radford, A., Sutskever, I., Leike, J., and Wu, J. Scal-ing and evaluating sparse autoencoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04093 , 2024. Genone, J. and Lombrozo, T. Concept possession, experi-mental semantics, and hybrid theories of reference. Philo-sophical Psychology , 25(5):717–742, 2012. Ghiasi, A., Kazemi, H., Reich, S., Zhu, C., Goldblum, M., and Goldstein, T. Plug-in inversion: Model-agnostic in-version for vision with data augmentations. Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning ,2021. Ghiasi, A., Kazemi, H., Borgnia, E., Reich, S., Shu, M., Goldblum, M., Wilson, A. G., and Goldstein, T. What do vision transformers learn? A visual exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06727 , 2022. Ghorbani, A., Wexler, J., Zou, J. Y., and Kim, B. Towards automatic concept-based explanations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2019. Gillis, N. Nonnegative matrix factorization . SIAM, 2020. Gorton, L. The missing curve detectors of inceptionv1: Applying sparse autoencoders to inceptionv1 early vision. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.03662 , 2024. Graziani, M., Nguyen, A., O’Mahony, L., M ¨uller, H., and Andrearczyk, V. Concept discovery and dataset explo-ration with singular value decomposition. In Workshop-Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. Hamblin, C., Fel, T., Saha, S., Konkle, T., and Alvarez, G. Feature Accentuation: Revealing ‘What’ features respond to in natural images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10039 ,2024. Hansson, S. O., Belin, M.- ˚A., and Lundgren, B. Self-driving vehicles-An ethical overview. Philosophy & Technology ,pp. 1–26, 2021. 11 Universal Sparse Autoencoders: Interpretable Cross-Model Concept Alignment 

Hase, P. and Bansal, M. Evaluating explainable AI: Which algorithmic explanations help users predict model behav-ior? Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics , 2020. Henderson, P., Li, X., Jurafsky, D., Hashimoto, T., Lemley, M. A., and Liang, P. Foundation models and fair use. 

Journal of Machine Learning Research , 24(400):1–79, 2023. House, T. W. President biden issues executive order on safe, secure, and trustworthy artificial intelligence. The White House , 2023. Hsieh, C.-Y., Yeh, C.-K., Liu, X., Ravikumar, P., Kim, S., Kumar, S., and Hsieh, C.-J. Evaluations and methods for explanation through robustness analysis. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representa-tions , 2021. Huh, M., Cheung, B., Wang, T., and Isola, P. Position: The Platonic Representation Hypothesis. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning ,2024. Hurley, N. and Rickard, S. Comparing measures of sparsity. 

IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , 55(10):4723– 4741, 2009. Ioffe, S. and Szegedy, C. Batch normalization: accelerat-ing deep network training by reducing internal covariate shift. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning , 2015. Kim, B., Wattenberg, M., Gilmer, J., Cai, C., Wexler, J., and Viegas, F. Interpretability beyond feature attribu-tion: Quantitative testing with concept activation vectors (TCAV). In International Conference on Machine Learn-ing , 2018. Kim, S. S. Y., Meister, N., Ramaswamy, V. V., Fong, R., and Russakovsky, O. HIVE: Evaluating the human inter-pretability of visual explanations. In Proceedings of the IEEE European Conference on Computer Vision , 2022. Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. Adam: A method for stochastic op-timization. Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations , 2015. Koh, P. W., Nguyen, T., Tang, Y. S., Mussmann, S., Pierson, E., Kim, B., and Liang, P. Concept bottleneck models. In 

International Conference on Machine Learning , 2020. Kowal, M., Dave, A., Ambrus, R., Gaidon, A., Derpanis, K. G., and Tokmakov, P. Understanding video transform-ers via universal concept discovery. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2024a. Kowal, M., Wildes, R. P., and Derpanis, K. G. Visual con-cept connectome (VCC): Open world concept discovery and their interlayer connections in deep models. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2024b. Kowal, M., Siam, M., Islam, M. A., Bruce, N. D., Wildes, R. P., and Derpanis, K. G. Quantifying and learning static vs. dynamic information in deep spatiotemporal networks. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 2025. Kriegeskorte, N., Mur, M., and Bandettini, P. A. Repre-sentational similarity analysis-connecting the branches of systems neuroscience. Frontiers in systems neuroscience ,2:249, 2008. Kuhn, H. W. The Hungarian method for the assignment problem. Naval Research Logistics Quarterly , 2:83–97, 1955. doi: 10.1002/nav.3800020109. Lindsey, J., Templeton, A., Marcus, J., Conerly, T., Bat-son, J., and Olah, C. Sparse crosscoders for cross-layer features and model diffing. 2024. https://transformer-circuits.pub/2024/crosscoders/index.html. Liu, Z., Luo, P., Wang, X., and Tang, X. Deep learning face attributes in the wild. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision , December 2015. Mahdizadehaghdam, S., Panahi, A., Krim, H., and Dai, L. Deep dictionary learning: A parametric network ap-proach. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing , 28(10): 4790–4802, 2019. Mahendran, A. and Vedaldi, A. Understanding deep image representations by inverting them. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2015. Mairal, J., Bach, F., and Ponce, J. Sparse modeling for image and vision processing. Foundations and Trends® in Computer Graphics and Vision , 8(2-3):85–283, 2014. Menon, A., Shrivastava, M., Krueger, D., and Lubana, E. S. Analyzing (in) abilities of SAEs via formal languages. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.11767 , 2024. Mordvintsev, A., Olah, C., and Tyka, M. Incep-tionism: Going deeper into neural networks. 

https://blog.research.google/2015/06/inceptionism-going-deeper-into-neural.html?m=1 , 2015. Moschella, L., Maiorca, V., Fumero, M., Norelli, A., Lo-catello, F., and Rodol `a, E. Relative representations enable zero-shot latent space communication. Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations ,2022. 12 Universal Sparse Autoencoders: Interpretable Cross-Model Concept Alignment 

Muzellec, S., Andeol, L., Fel, T., VanRullen, R., and Serre, T. Gradient strikes back: How filtering out high frequen-cies improves explanations. Proceedings of the Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. Nguyen, A., Yosinski, J., and Clune, J. Understanding neu-ral networks via feature visualization: A survey. Explain-able AI: interpreting, explaining and visualizing deep learning , 2019. Nguyen, G., Kim, D., and Nguyen, A. The effectiveness of feature attribution methods and its correlation with auto-matic evaluation scores. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2021. Olah, C., Mordvintsev, A., and Schubert, L. Feature vi-sualization. Distill , 2017. doi: 10.23915/distill.00007. https://distill.pub/2017/feature-visualization. Oquab, M., Darcet, T., Moutakanni, T., Vo, H., Szafraniec, M., Khalidov, V., Fernandez, P., Haziza, D., Massa, F., El-Nouby, Alaaeldin Assran, M., Ballas, N., Galuba, W., Howes, R., Huang, P.-Y., Li, S.-W., Misra, I., Rabbat, M., Sharma, V., Synnaeve, G., Xu, H., Jegou, H., Mairal, J., Labatut, P., Joulin, A., and Bojanowski, P. Dinov2: Learn-ing robust visual features without supervision. Transac-tions on Machine Learning Research , 2023. Papyan, V., Romano, Y., and Elad, M. Convolutional dictio-nary learning via local processing. International Confer-ence on Computer Vision , 2017. Parekh, J., Khayatan, P., Shukor, M., Newson, A., and Cord, M. A concept-based explainability framework for large multimodal models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. Radford, A., Kim, J. W., Hallacy, C., Ramesh, A., Goh, G., Agarwal, S., Sastry, G., Askell, A., Mishkin, P., Clark, J., Krueger, G., and Sutskever, I. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In 

International Conference on Machine Learning , 2021. Rajamanoharan, S., Lieberum, T., Sonnerat, N., Conmy, A., Varma, V., Kram ´ar, J., and Nanda, N. Jumping ahead: Improving reconstruction fidelity with jumprelu sparse autoencoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.14435 , 2024. Rao, S., Mahajan, S., B ¨ohle, M., and Schiele, B. Discover-then-name: Task-agnostic concept bottlenecks via auto-mated concept discovery. In Proceedings of the IEEE European Conference on Computer Vision , 2024. Rubinstein, R., Bruckstein, A. M., and Elad, M. Dictionaries for sparse representation modeling. Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing , 2010. Santurkar, S., Ilyas, A., Tsipras, D., Engstrom, L., Tran, B., and Madry, A. Image synthesis with a single (robust) classifier. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 32, 2019. Selvaraju, R. R., Cogswell, M., Das, A., Vedantam, R., Parikh, D., and Batra, D. Grad-CAM: Visual explana-tions from deep networks via gradient-based localization. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision ,2017. Simonyan, K., Vedaldi, A., and Zisserman, A. Deep inside convolutional networks: Visualising image classification models and saliency maps. Proceedings of the Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations , 2014. Sixt, L., Granz, M., and Landgraf, T. When explanations lie: Why many modified BP attributions fail. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning ,2020. Smilkov, D., Thorat, N., Kim, B., Vi ´egas, F., and Watten-berg, M. Smoothgrad: Removing noise by adding noise. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.03825 , 2017. Springenberg, J. T., Dosovitskiy, A., Brox, T., and Ried-miller, M. Striving for simplicity: The all convolutional net. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6806 , 2014. Sucholutsky, I., Muttenthaler, L., Weller, A., Peng, A., Bobu, A., Kim, B., Love, B. C., Grant, E., Groen, I., Achterberg, J., et al. Getting aligned on representational alignment. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.13018 , 2023. Sundararajan, M., Taly, A., and Yan, Q. Axiomatic attribu-tion for deep networks. In Proceedings of the Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning , 2017. Surkov, V., Wendler, C., Terekhov, M., Deschenaux, J., West, R., and Gulcehre, C. Unpacking sdxl turbo: Inter-preting text-to-image models with sparse autoencoders. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.22366 , 2024. Tamkin, A., Taufeeque, M., and Goodman, N. D. Codebook features: Sparse and discrete interpretability for neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.17230 , 2023. Tariyal, S., Majumdar, A., Singh, R., and Vatsa, M. Deep dictionary learning. IEEE Access , 4:10096–10109, 2016. Tasissa, A., Tankala, P., Murphy, J. M., and Ba, D. K-deep simplex: Manifold learning via local dictionaries. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing , 2023. To ˇsi ´c, I. and Frossard, P. Dictionary learning. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine , 28(2):27–38, 2011. 13 Universal Sparse Autoencoders: Interpretable Cross-Model Concept Alignment 

Tsipras, D., Santurkar, S., Engstrom, L., Turner, A., and Madry, A. Robustness may be at odds with accuracy. In 

Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations , 2019. Vielhaben, J., Bluecher, S., and Strodthoff, N. Multi-dimensional concept discovery (MCD): A unifying frame-work with completeness guarantees. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2023. Wattenberg, M. and Vi ´egas, F. B. Relational composition in neural networks: A survey and call to action. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.14662 , 2024. Wightman, R. PyTorch Image Models. https://github. com/rwightman/pytorch-image-models , 2019. Williams, R. Inverting a connectionist network mapping by back-propagation of error. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society , 1986. Wright, S. Correlation and causation. Journal of Agricul-tural Research , 20(7):557–585, 1921. Yu, Y., Buchanan, S., Pai, D., Chu, T., Wu, Z., Tong, S., Haeffele, B., and Ma, Y. White-box transformers via sparse rate reduction. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023. Zeiler, M. D. and Fergus, R. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE European Conference on Computer Vision , 2014. Zhai, X., Mustafa, B., Kolesnikov, A., and Beyer, L. Sig-moid loss for language image pre-training. In IEEE Inter-national Conference on Computer Vision , 2023. Zhang, R., Madumal, P., Miller, T., Ehinger, K. A., and Ru-binstein, B. I. Invertible concept-based explanations for CNN models with non-negative concept activation vec-tors. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2021. Zhou, J., Wei, C., Wang, H., Shen, W., Xie, C., Yuille, A., and Kong, T. iBoT: Image bert pre-training with online tokenizer. Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. 14 Universal Sparse Autoencoders: Interpretable Cross-Model Concept Alignment 

## A. Appendix 

A.1. SAE Training Implementation details 

We modify the TopK Sparse Autoencoder (SAE) (Gao et al., 2024) by replacing the ℓ2 loss with an ℓ1 loss, as we find that this adjustment improves both training dynamics and the interpretability of the learned concepts. The encoder consists of a single linear layer followed by batch normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015) and a ReLU activation function, while the decoder is a simple dictionary matrix. For all experiments, we use a dictionary of size 8 × 768 = 6144 which is an expansion factor of 8 multiplied by the largest feature dimension in any of the three models, 768 . All SAE encoder-decoder pairs have independent Adam optimizers (Kingma & Ba, 2015), each with an initial learning rate of 3e −4, which decays to 1e −6 following a cosine schedule with linear warmup. To account for variations in activation scales caused by architectural differences, we standardize each model’s activations using 1000 random samples from the training set. Specifically, we compute the mean and standard deviation of activations for each model and apply standardization, thereby preserving the relative relationship between activation magnitudes and directions while mitigating scale differences. Since SigLIP does not incorporate a class token, we remove class tokens from DinoV2 and ViT to ensure consistency across models. Additionally, we interpolate the DinoV2 token count to match a patch size of 16 × 16 pixels, aligning it with SigLIP and ViT. We train all USAEs on a single NVIDIA RTX 6000 GPU, with training completing in approximately three days. 

A.2. Unique DinoV2 Concepts 

DinoV2’s unique concepts are presented in Figures 10 and 11. Interestingly, we find concepts that solely fire for DinoV2 related to depth , perspective , and geometric cues. Concept - 4756 Object Depth   

> Concept - 1710 Background Depth (Uphill)
> Figure 10. Qualitative results of low-entropy concepts that fire for DinoV2. We discover features related to depth cues for foreground objects as well as background in concept 4756 (above) and 1710 (below).

15 Universal Sparse Autoencoders: Interpretable Cross-Model Concept Alignment Concept - 4191 Top Face of Prism   

> Concept - 3448 Brim of Dome
> Concept - 1530 Prism Corners
> Figure 11. Qualitative results for low-entropy concepts that fire for DinoV2. We discover DinoV2 independent features that are not universal suggesting 3D understanding like corners (concepts 1530), top face of rectangular prism (concept 4191), and brim of dome (concept 3448).

A.3. Unique SigLIP Concepts 

Similar to DinoV2, we isolate concepts with low firing-entropy where probability mass is concentrated for SigLIP. Example concepts are presented in Fig. 12. We observe concepts that fire for both visual and textual elements of the same concept. Concept 5718 fires for both the shape of a star, as well as regions of images with the word or even just a subset of letters on a bottlecap and sign at different scales. Additionally, concept 2898 fires broadly for various musical instruments, as well as music notes, while concept 923 fires for the letter ‘C’. For each of these concepts, the coordinated activation maximization visualization has both the physical semantic representation of the concept, as well as printed text. The presence of image and textual elements are expected given SigLIP is trained as a vision-language model with a contrastive learning objective, where the aim is to align image and text latent representations from separate image and language encoders. While we do not train on any activations directly from the language model, we still observe textual concepts in our image-space visualizations. 

A.4. Out-of-Distribution Generalization 

In order to assess the out-of-distribution capabilities of our approach, we use DTD (Cimpoi et al., 2014) and CelebA (Liu et al., 2015) as the validation dataset for our ImageNet trained USAEs and show strong evidence of generalization outside of the training distribution as seen in Table 1. We find consistent activation reconstruction accuracy (measured by MSE and R2), consistent trends in co-firing metrics in Fig. 13 and visualize some of the most important concepts for these new datasets, along with their associated highest activating images, from ImageNet in Fig. 14 and 15. Despite differences in domain and semantics, USAEs trained on ImageNet exhibited robust generalization to both DTD and CelebA. Importantly, many of the concepts identified in these datasets also aligned with high-activation concepts from ImageNet, suggesting that the USAE dictionary captures generalizable structure beyond its training data. 16 Universal Sparse Autoencoders: Interpretable Cross-Model Concept Alignment Concept - 5718 Star (Shape + Letter)   

> Concept - 923 Capital C
> Concept - 2898 Music (Instruments + Notes)
> Figure 12. Qualitative results of low-entropy SigLIP concepts. We consistently find concepts that fire for abstract concepts in image space such as images or text of ‘star’ (concept 923), letters (concept 5718), and music notes (concept 2958).

Mean Squared Error (MSE) ↓ Coefficient of Determination (R²) ↑

Model ImageNet DTD CelebA ImageNet DTD CelebA 

SigLIP 0.39 0.38 0.48 0.61 0.54 0.52 DinoV2 0.19 0.26 0.22 0.77 0.69 0.75 

ViT 0.41 0.56 0.69 0.59 0.46 0.45  

> Table 1. Performance comparison of vision models across different datasets. Lower MSE and higher R² indicate better performance.

A.5. Additional Results 

A.5.1. A DDITIONAL QUANTITATIVE RESULTS 

Figure 16 presents concept consistency distributions across models for the top 1,000 co-firing concepts. We find an overall increase in consistency between individual and universal concepts: the most universal (highest co-firing) concepts are more likely to be found in each model’s respective independently trained SAE. Within this thresholded range, we find DinoV2 to exhibit the highest similarity between individual and universal concepts with an average cosine similarity of 0.65 , followed by ViT at 0.52 and SigLIP at 0.40 . DinoV2 concepts seem to be better represented in the universal space, suggesting that some models may have more universal concepts than others. A.5.2. A DDITIONAL QUALITATIVE RESULTS 

We provide additional universal concept visualizations for the top activating images for that concept across each model. Specifically, we showcase low-level concepts in Fig. 17 related to texture like shell and wood for concepts 1716 and 2533, respectively, as well as tiling for concept 5563. We also showcase high-level concepts in Fig. 18 related to environments like auditoriums in concept 4691, object interactions like ground contact in concept 5346, as well as facial features like snouts in concept 3479. 17 Universal Sparse Autoencoders: Interpretable Cross-Model Concept Alignment Firing Metrics OOD Generalization to CelebA Firing Metrics OOD Generalization to DTD 

Figure 13. Zero-shot generalization quantitative results of universal concepts on out-of-distribution datasets. Top: When applying our ImageNet trained USAE to the validation set of CelebA we find consistent trends across each of our universality metrics. We find a clear correlation between co-firing and concept importance. The distribution over firing entropy also indicates concepts that fire uniquely for a single model, two of three models, and universal concepts that fire for all three. Bottom: When applying our ImageNet trained USAE to the validation set of DTD we find consistent trends across each of our universality metrics. We find a clear correlation between co-firing and concept importance. The distribution over firing entropy is tri-modal, indicating concepts that fire uniquely for a single model, two of three models, and universal concepts that fire for all three. 

18 Universal Sparse Autoencoders: Interpretable Cross-Model Concept Alignment 

Figure 14. Qualitative examples of zero-shot generalization of ImageNet trained USAE on CelebA. Top: We depict high-level visual concept dimension related to sunglasses and the highest activating images for the validation sets of both ImageNet and CelebA. Bottom: 

We depict the lower-jaw concept’s highest activating images for the validation set of ImageNet and CelebA. This jaw concept generalizes beyond animal jaw to include human jaws as seen from our CelebA heatmaps. 

19 Universal Sparse Autoencoders: Interpretable Cross-Model Concept Alignment 

Figure 15. Qualitative examples of zero-shot generalization of ImageNet trained USAE on DTD. Top: We depict a checkerboard concept’s highest activating images for the validation set of ImageNet and DTD. This checkerboard concept generalizes from low-level textures in DTD like tiles to sudoku and crossword puzzles in ImageNet. Bottom: We depict a concept for zebra stripes and its highest activating images for the validation set of ImageNet and DTD. This stripe concept generalizes across scales for images zoomed in on the animal in DTD to across a whole zebra in ImageNet. 

20 Universal Sparse Autoencoders: Interpretable Cross-Model Concept Alignment 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

> Cosine Similarity Threshold
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Fraction of Concepts > CS Threshold
> Concept Matches Across Cosine Similarity Thresholds Top 1000 cofiring Concepts
> SigLIP (AUC=0.40)
> DinoV2 (AUC=0.65)
> ViT (AUC=0.52)
> Random Baseline (AUC=0.13)

Figure 16. Top 1000 co-firing concept consistency between independent SAEs and Universal SAEs. Our universal training objective discovers universal concepts that have overlap (i.e., cosine similarity) with those discovered with independent training. In descending order, Universal SAEs have highest overlap with independently trained DinoV2, ViT, and SigLIP. The smaller overlap observed with SigLIP suggests the aligned image-language embedding space produces unique concepts that are more distinct from those in DinoV2 and ViT. 

A.6. Limitations 

Our universal concept discovery objective successfully discovers fundamental visual concepts encoded between vision models trained under distinct objectives and architectures, and allows us to explore features that fire distinctly for a particular model of interest under our regime. However, we note some limitations that we aim to address in future work. We notice some sensitivity to hyperparameters when increasing the number of models involved in universal training, and use hyperparameter sweeps to find an optimal configuration. We also constrain our problem to discovering features at the last layer of each vision model. We choose to do so as a tractable first step in this novel paradigm of learning to discover universal features. We leave an exploration of universal features across different layer depths for future work. Lastly, we do find qualitatively that a small percentage of concepts are uninterpretable. They may be still stored in superposition (Elhage et al., 2022) or they could be useful for the model but simply difficult for humans to make sense of. This is a phenomena that independently trained SAEs suffer from as well. Many of the limitations of our approach are tightly coupled to the limitations of training independent SAEs, an active area of research. 21 Universal Sparse Autoencoders: Interpretable Cross-Model Concept Alignment ViT   

> SigLIP
> Dino
> Concept 1716 - Shell Concept 2533 - Wood Concept 5563 - Tiling

Figure 17. Qualitative results of universal concepts. We depict low-level visual features related to textures, such as shells (concept 1716), wood (concept 2533), and tiling (concept 5563). ViT   

> SigLIP
> Dino
> Concept 4691 - Auditorium Concept 5346 - Ground Contact Concept 3479 - Dark Snout

Figure 18. Qualitative results of universal concepts. We depict high-level visual features related to environments, such as auditoriums (concept 4691), ground contact (concept 5346), and animal snouts (concept 3479). 

22