Title: Some Tokens Behave like Magnets: Revealing Linguistic Organization in the Layers of Language Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.05743v1

Published Time: Wed, 09 Sep 2026 00:22:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
## Some Tokens Behave like Magnets: Revealing Linguistic Organization in the Layers of Language Models 

Andrew Liu ∗, Devan Srinivasan ∗, Gerald Penn 

University of Toronto Department of Computer Science 

{aliu, devan, gpenn}@cs.toronto.edu 

Abstract 

We identify a special group of token vectors inside large language models (LLMs) — which we term magnetic vectors — that organize the surrounding tokens by either attracting or re-pelling them. Particularly, tokens pointing the same way as an attracting magnet are elon-gated; tokens pointing the same way as a re-pelling magnet are compressed. Just as phys-ical magnets pull or push away the iron fil-ings around them, these vectors organize their surroundings through two opposing polarities. Moreover, we identify a statistically significant pattern in linguistic category where function words consistently act as repelling magnets in early layers, and we also find magnets consis-tently reorganize their polarities in unique ways deeper in the model. In a further case study we find this observation may unveil a deliberate, layer-wise organization in how LLMs process language. This pattern is consistent across different LLM architectures, sizes, and layer configurations. It is also causally relevant. When the LLM is fine-tuned for a downstream task, the task-functional tokens emerge as magnets. E.g., in question answering, the answer-span tokens be-come uniquely repelling magnets in the final layer, geometrically carving the answer out of the surrounding context. Furthermore, remov-ing early-layer repelling magnets devastates syntactic tasks (POS tagging accuracy drops from 91% to below 10%) while sparing se-mantic ones, and removing late-layer attracting magnets does the reverse. We believe this phe-nomenon warrants further investigation, as it opens the first probe-free path to understanding how language models geometrically organize linguistic computation across their layers. 1

> ∗

Equal contribution. 

> 1

Our code is available at https://github.com/ Andrwyl/SomeTokensBehaveLikeMagnets attraction                      

> movie
> amazing
> The repulsion
> amazing
> The movie was amazing .
> The movie was amazing .
> The movie was amazing .
> The movie was amazing .
> The movie was amazing .
> functional
> Layers

Figure 1: Magnets. In the sentence The movie was amazing . we see magnetism of different kinds as progress through the model. Early on, function tokens 

The , was , and . are strong repelling magnets, shortening surrounding vectors which point in the same direction. Later on we see The and amazing are strong attractors, lengthening surrounding vectors that point similarly to them. The right panel shows the underlying geometry: a repelling magnet (e.g., The ) compresses tokens aligned with it, while an attracting magnet (e.g., amazing ) elon-gates them. This pattern is consistent across LLM fami-lies. 

1 Introduction 

A recent thread of research on explaining black-box language models, known as mechanistic inter-pretability, has utilized ideas from representational geometry, where researchers analyse the geometry of vector embeddings of meaning. While fruitful, these results focus on angles and cosines, com-monly ignoring lengths/norms (Lee et al. (2025); Elhage et al. (2022); Jha et al. (2025); Ethayarajh (2019); Mikolov et al. (2013) are some examples). This seems to have happened without forethought; indeed, we surmise that most researchers in this area would readily acknowledge that both are im-portant to a vector representations. In this paper, we elucidate a peculiar, coarse but nevertheless linguistically interpretable geometric organization in token vector representations within stacked transformer-based language models. At some transformer layer, certain vectors serve as arXiv:2609.05743v1 [cs.CL] 4 Sep 2026 magnets of a repelling or attracting polarity. Re-pelling magnets have the effect where vectors that point in a similar direction are shortened, and those that are more orthogonal are lengthened. Attract-ing magnets perform oppositely, vectors that point similarly are lengthened, while those more orthog-onal are shortened. Formally, their angular paral-lelism to other vectors is tightly correlated with the norms of those other vectors, mediated by the depth of the representation within the transformer. We coin these curious vectors as magnets (Figure 1). Magnets exhibit clear patterns across transformer blocks and they have important consequences for downstream tasks. Magnets naturally reveal layer-wise linguistic patterns not just in classical models like BERT, but also larger more recent models, and consistently across numerous natural language topics (health-care, news, etc.). Magnets exhibit a progression from early to middle to late blocks of these models in a way that is consistent across different LLM families and sizes. Even more strikingly, they dis-criminate between tokens based on whether the to-kens are function words/affixes (determiners, con-junctions etc.) or content words/affixes (nouns, verbs etc.). But these regularities are only observ-able by considering both angles and magnitude. They’re found purely from the intrinsic geometry of the model, absent of any confounding auxiliary mechanisms such as probes. As such, magnetic vectors provide a new lens through which we can assess the potential functional importance of layers in neural language models. This is, to our knowl-edge, the first direct, observational evidence of lin-guistic organization across layers that is intrinsic to the models themselves. We additionally investigate the role of these mag-nets at differing layers on downstream tasks, by focusing on BERT as a case-study: if magnets sup-port the idea of early-layer syntax and late-layer semantics, early-layer magnets should be impor-tant to syntactic tasks and later-layer magnets to semantic ones. Shockingly, we find that this is the case: early-layer magnets have outsized influ-ence on part-of-speech tagging (a syntactic task) performance, while late-layer magnets are sharply connected with sentiment analysis and question answering (semantic tasks). Together, our results present the first model-faithful support for layer-wise linguistic attribu-tion, an idea long supported but never adequately substantiated, and extends it to modern large-scale language models. Magnet vectors offer a new lens and geometric perspective to understanding repre-sentations. Cumulatively, the contributions of this work are as follows: 1. We identify magnetic vectors in the represen-tations of numerous large language models 2. We find magnets exhibit consistent organiza-tion across layers and are sensitive to linguis-tic categories across models. 3. We provide evidence that BERT’s early-layer and late-layer magnets play an important role in a chosen pair of syntactic and semantic tasks, respectively. 

2 Related Work 

Interpretability Our work is related to the ever-growing interest in understanding how language models work, known as interpretability . Current popular methods in the subfield include but are not limited to attributing facets of knowledge to components of the model (Dai et al., 2022; Niu et al., 2024), attributing performance to certain salient training data points (Grosse et al., 2023; Liu and Penn, 2025), finding latent features that correspond to interpretable features (Cunningham et al., 2023; Templeton et al., 2024), or leveraging topology to identify key structure in models (Rieck et al., 2019). There has also been some success in identifying interpretable circuits and computation graphs within the model (Wang et al., 2023; Conmy et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2025). 

Layer-wise Linguistic Attribution Early at-tempts to understand the mechanisms of BERT re-lied on probing, where an auxiliary model is trained to extract features from representations (Hewitt and Manning, 2019). This resulted in the proposal that the layers of BERT encode the classical NLP pipeline , where early layers process syntax and later layers process semantics (Jawahar et al., 2019; Tenney et al., 2019). While initially embraced, this idea was heavily contested (Niu et al., 2022) due to the use of probing: the core issue being it is unclear whether the probe itself has simply learned the property being probed for. As such, this and related work in layer-wise attribution have largely fallen to the wayside as previous methods could not disentangle their results. In addition, this line of work has rarely been expanded beyond BERT. Representation Geometry Our finding relates to the growing body of geometric analysis within language models. This includes learned transfor-mations that reveal striking geometric structure in days of the week (Engels et al., 2025), as well as spatiotemporal data like landmarks (Gurnee and Tegmark, 2024). These relate to the general linear representation hypothesis (Park et al., 2024) which posits features are stored as directions, and similar analysis reveals influential directions that repre-sent concepts (Park et al., 2025). Lee et al. (2025) even found shared angular structure between lan-guage model spaces. These geometric approaches seldom incorporate vector length in their analysis, however. An older but highly important work is by Ethayarajh (2019) which demonstrates increas-ing anisotropy across layers of transformer models. While their work is one of the first to show vec-tor geometry transforming across layers, our phe-nomenon is unrelated to the degree of anisotropy at each layer and thus presents an entirely differ-ent geometric phenomenon that changes moving through layers. Building upon these works, we analyse the ge-ometry of hidden representations, but include mag-nitude along with angles. We find interpretable, domain-agnostic, linguistic structure across the model, crucially without auxiliary training or mod-ules. This provides entirely model-faithful inter-pretability of hidden state representations. 

3 Magnetic Vectors 

Magnetic vectors affect the surrounding space: Re-pelling vectors shorten vectors who point in a similar direction (small angle) and lengthen those far away, whereas attracting vectors do the op-posite, lengthen those close in angular proximity, and shorten those far away. It’s like a push and pull, repulsion and attraction, and we can mathe-matically formalize this phenomenon. Given in-put tokens X = [ x1, x 2, x 3, . . . , x n], let V l =[vl

> 1

, v l

> 2

, . . . , v ln] be the vector representations for each token at layer l.We can formally define vector magnetism at some layer l as follows. Let cos _sim u : V l →

[−1, 1] be the cosine similarity function given as 

cos _sim u(v) = cos( θu,v )

where θu,v denotes the angle between any u, v . De-note the norm function as || · || . We say u ∈ V l is a 

magnet at layer l if cos _sim u is predictive of || · || The 

> Stacy
> to
> walked
> dog

.

> The
> Stacy
> to
> walked
> dog

.      

> Figure 2: Toy example of The dog walked to Stacy
> in R2. For repelling vectors closer angular proximity indicates a smaller norm. For attracting vectors closer angular proximity indicates a larger norm.

across all tokens in the input. To determine this, we fit a linear regression between the two series: 

[cos _sim u(v) : v ∈ V l] and [|| v|| : v ∈ V l], and take the R2 value to be the magnet strength . The sign of the regression we define as the polarity of the magnet. If the signed R2 is negative then the magnet is repelling, and if positive it is attracting. 2

Working through the example in Figure 2, con-sider the sequence of tokens The dog walked to Stacy . We pass it through some model and get the outputs after layer l. We denote the vector represen-tations outputted by this layer as v1, v 2, v 3, v 4, v 5

where v5 is the representation for Stacy and v1 is the representation for The . Consider v1 as a candi-date magnet. We take the cosine similarity between 

v1 and all other vectors, which gives us the series 

A = [cos( θv1,v 1 ), cos( θv1,v 2 ), · · · , cos( θv1,v 5 )] .Then we compute the norms, that is B =[|| v1|| , || v2|| , · · · , || v5|| ]. We then fit a linear re-gression between A and B. Suppose the R2 of the linear regression is 0.8 and the relationship is negative, we would say that at this layer, v1 or The 

is a very strong repelling magnet (strength of -0.8). Again, geometrically the intuition is simple. The 

is a repelling vector so other tokens with similar directions will be small in length, while dog is an attracting one, so other tokens with similar direc-tions will be long. In practice our approach can be parallelized for efficiency on very large models and samples, see Appendix A for details. 

3.1 Significance of Existence 

As it stands, it is curious to find such a phenomenon in language models, as there is no clear bias in the transformer architecture or language model train-ing that would encourage such organization. We find every model frequently exhibits magnets as strong as ±0.7 to ±0.8 regardless of context which is a very significant relationship, indicating this or-ganization is not noise or some anomaly. Further     

> 2We use terms repelling vector ,repelling magnet , or re-pelling token interchangeably for the ease of narration.

investigation, presented in detail later, reveals these magnets follow layer-wise patterns aligned across various model architectures, and exhibit clear lin-guistic separation and impact on downstream tasks which sediments the impact of this discovery. 

4 Experiments 

Our main line of experimentation investigates the patterns that magnets follow across different inputs and models. The core questions we seek to answer are whether magnets emerge in certain ways at dif-ferent points in the model (early, middle, late) and whether certain types of tokens tend to be attracting or repelling vectors. We find that, extraordinarily, magnets have linguistically-guided layer-wise and token-wise patterns that are stable and consistent across many contexts and models. 

4.1 Setup 

We manually curate a dataset of 100 paragraphs, each around 200 words, spanning different contexts like news articles, healthcare sites etc (details in Appendix B). We investigate five models, BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), GPT2 (Radford et al., 2019), Qwen2.5-3B (Yang et al., 2024), Gemma3-1B (Team et al., 2025), and Llama3.2-3B (Grattafiori et al., 2024). These models are chosen for specific reasons: BERT due to the large amounts of previ-ous work attempting to extract linguistic structure from its representations at a layer-level, GPT2 as a foundational, well-studied decoder model in in-terpretability research, and Qwen/Gemma/Llama to validate that our structure exists on larger-scale modern models as well. For each paragraph, we observe the magnet properties of each token at each layer for each model. These experiments are motivated by a surpris-ing observation: language models tend to delegate function tokens as repelling magnets early in the model, one of the first signs of linguistic separation being encoded natively in the representations. In addition, early layers contain magnets that are pri-marily one polarity, middle layers exhibit a transi-tion period where the polarities of magnets change and possibly change back (a bowtie effect), before establishing themselves in the later layers. For example in Figure 3: in early layers the function tokens are consistently identified as repelling (red) before a phase transition in the middle and the at-tracting magnets are established in the late layers. Appendix F presents visual examples for the other models, and Appendix C shows this bowtie transi-tion phenomenon in the middle layers holds for all models across our dataset. To comprehensively test that early-layer repelling magnets are consistently function tokens, we use a part-of-speech tagger to tag a word with its part-of-speech type. If the word is labeled with a content tag (nouns, verbs etc.) we give it a label of 1, otherwise it is labeled 0. For each word in the dataset and for each layer, we now have a label for whether it is function or content as well as a magnet strength. We com-pute a Point-Biserial Correlation (PBC) between these two variables at each layer, allowing us to test whether there is indeed a correlation between mag-net polarity and syntactic category at each layer. We must include special consideration for our decoder models. Our magnet property is a prop-erty of a token’s representation relative to the other representations in the input. Thus, there is an issue with directly applying the calculation to decoder representations. Since tokens do not see forward in the input, it is meaningless to calculate a regression score between some token property with any to-kens after it, as they are independent by design. We leverage the main idea in Leviathan et al. (2025) to work around this, repeating the input, then only computing magnets on the repeated portion which can attend to itself via the earlier instance. Details of this implementation and other modifications we had tried are explained in Appendix D. 

4.2 Results 

Figure 4 presents the point-biserial correlation co-efficient for each model across their layers. We see that our initial observations are corroborated. At the early layers for the models, the correlation coefficient is as high as 0.8 indicating a very strong connection between the magnet properties and the syntactic type of a token. Function tokens over-whelmingly tend to be repelling magnets at the early layers. Moving deeper in the model, the co-efficient begins to decline in-line with that bowtie 

transition phase we previously observed before late-layer magnets are formed. The establishment of this layer-wise structure emerging across models hearkens back to previ-ous work connecting BERT to the classical NLP pipeline, which roughly proposed that early layers processed syntax while later layers processed se-mantics. We can see that our magnet structure has striking similarities to the proposed pipeline due to its layer-wise nature. The pipeline proposes a syn-[CLS] Met ab olis m ( , from Greek : μ ε τ α β ο λ ή meta bol ē , " change " ) refers to the set of life -sustaining chemical reactions that occur within living organisms . The three main functions of metabolism are the conversion of energy in food into a usable form for cellular processes ; the conversion of food to building blocks of mac rom ole cule s ( bio pol yme rs ) such as proteins , lip ids , nuclei c acids , and some car bo hy dra tes ; and the ex cre tion of metabolic waste s . These enzyme -cat aly zed reactions allow organisms to grow , reproduce , maintain their structures , and respond to their environments . [SEP] [CLS] Met ab olis m ( , from Greek : μ ε τ α β ο λ ή meta bol ē , " change " ) refers to the set of life -sustaining chemical reactions that occur within living organisms . The three main functions of metabolism are the conversion of energy in food into a usable form for cellular processes ; the conversion of food to building blocks of mac rom ole cule s ( bio pol yme rs ) such as proteins , lip ids , nuclei c acids , and some car bo hy dra tes ; and the ex cre tion of metabolic waste s . These enzyme -cat aly zed reactions allow organisms to grow , reproduce , maintain their structures , and respond to their environments . [SEP] [CLS] Met ab olis m ( , from Greek : μ ε τ α β ο λ ή meta bol ē , " change " ) refers to the set of life -sustaining chemical reactions that occur within living organisms . The three main functions of metabolism are the conversion of energy in food into a usable form for cellular processes ; the conversion of food to building blocks of mac rom ole cule s ( bio pol yme rs ) such as proteins , lip ids , nuclei c acids , and some car bo hy dra tes ; and the ex cre tion of metabolic waste s . These enzyme -cat aly zed reactions allow organisms to grow , reproduce , maintain their structures , and respond to their environments . [SEP] [CLS] Met ab olis m ( , from Greek : μ ε τ α β ο λ ή meta bol ē , " change " ) refers to the set of life -sustaining chemical reactions that occur within living organisms . The three main functions of metabolism are the conversion of energy in food into a usable form for cellular processes ; the conversion of food to building blocks of mac rom ole cule s ( bio pol yme rs ) such as proteins , lip ids , nuclei c acids , and some car bo hy dra tes ; and the ex cre tion of metabolic waste s . These enzyme -cat aly zed reactions allow organisms to grow , reproduce , maintain their structures , and respond to their environments . [SEP] 

Layer 11 

Layer 8 

Layer 5 

Layer 2 Figure 3: The evolution of magnet tokens moving through BERT. Early layers exhibit only repelling magnetic vectors ( red ) and they tend to be function tokens, moving through the layers they change gradually in intensity and polarity until strongly attracting magnets ( blue ) become the majority. 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 Layers 0.2 

> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 Point-Biserial Correlation Coefficient
> Repelling Magnets Track Function Words in Early Layers
> BERT Gemma3 gpt2 Llama3.2 Qwen2.5

Figure 4: Correlation between magnet strengths and linguistic token type (function or content) at each layer. The early-layer repelling vectors are very often func-tion tokens and this tapers off moving deeper in the models. 

tax regime in the early layers, and it is in those early layers we observe repelling magnet structure sepa-rating syntactic and semantic tokens. The pipeline proposes a semantics regime in the late layers, and we find those late layers are the product of the 

bowtie transition of magnet polarities. The connec-tion is clear: our magnet structure indicates syntax early, a transition in the middle, and hints at se-mantics emerging late. We explore this deeply in subsequent experiments. We have obtained a natural way of proposing a projection of layers of language models onto the pipeline that sidesteps criticisms leveled at previous attempts to do so: we leverage only the intrinsic ge-ometry of the representations. In addition, we have shown these linguistically-guided layer properties exist not just for BERT, but in decoder models like GPT2 as well as modern, large-scale models like Qwen, Gemma, and Llama. 

5 BERT and Downstream Tasks 

We wish to obtain a stronger understanding of the role these identified magnets play in the processing steps of language models. If early-layer magnets are indeed tied to syntax, they should be important for syntactic tasks. If late-layer magnets are tied to semantics, they should be important for semantic tasks. For these experiments we focus on BERT for two reasons: first, it is the model primarily stud-ied in the context of layer-wise attribution, making it a natural point of comparison, and second, as an encoder model its tasks are more closed-ended and controlled. Tasks like part-of-speech tagging and sentiment classification have clearly defined syntactic and semantic interpretations allowing us to cleanly test the layer-wise linguistic categories we identify. In contrast, decoder models are more naturally suited for tasks such as open-ended rea-soning which is harder to decompose to the level of linguistic granularity that we would like. Our focus on BERT allows us to draw the most direct conclu-sions about our hypothesis, and is most grounded in previous work in the field. We select the following tasks for our study: 

(Syntax) Part-of-Speech Tagging (POS) This tasks a model with classifying the grammatical category of each token in the input sequence. Ex:  

> The

→ determiner (DET), Sword → verb (VB). This is a highly syntactic task as it requires sensitivity to the grammatical role each token plays in the sentence structure rather than its meaning. 

(Semantics) Sentiment Analysis This tasks a model with classifying the sentiment of a sample of text as positive or negative. Ex: The play was terrific → Good. This is a highly semantic task as it requires sensitivity to the meaning of the words rather than just grammatical structure. 

(Semantics) Question Answering (QA) This tasks a model with identifying the answer to a ques-tion in some text. Given the question and some con-text, it must identify the answer. Ex: What colour is the sky? The sky is blue and clouds are white 

→ blue . This is another highly semantic task, as meaning sensitivity is of key importance. 

5.1 Setup 

We fine-tune BERT on three standard datasets: CoNLL-2003 (Tjong Kim Sang and De Meulder, 2003) for POS tagging, SST2 (Socher et al., 2013) for sentiment analysis, and SQuAD v1 (Rajpurkar et al., 2016) for QA, yielding 3 models. In our main experiments we found magnets identified function tokens in the early layers, which we interpreted as a correspondence with the proposed syntactic pro-cessing regime of previous work. Additionally, we identified that when moving deeper into the model this linguistic separation fades away, and the model exhibits a transition period re-orienting the polarity of the majority magnets. We hypothesized that this transition aligned with the proposed transition from syntactic to seman-tic processing. In fact our preliminary investiga-tion with BERT revealed extraordinary connections between late-layer magnetic patterns and the sen-timent classification and QA tasks (our semantic tasks): In sentiment analysis, late-layer, strong, attracting magnets were tokens most ostensibly related to the sample’s sentiment (see Figure 5). When fine-tuned for QA, at these same late layers we observed that the answer spans are among the only strong repelling magnets whereas every other token is attracting, so magnets effectively carve the answer out of the paragraph (see Figure 6). Appendix E contains additional examples of the sentiment and QA task inputs. Motivated by these observations we wish to ex-haustively test the impact of the early and late-layer magnets on syntactic and semantic tasks, through two inquisitions. First we causally ablate magnets at the early and late layers by zeroing out (replac-ing with the zero vector) strong repelling magnets early on, and strong attracting magnets later on (strong is R2 > 0.5), and report the effects on syn-tax (through POS tagging) and semantics (through sentiment analysis). We also include the baseline of separately ablating an equal number of random tokens at each intervention. Note we do not ablate in middle layers as there are so few strong magnets to begin with. The second inquisition is QA, where in particu-lar we know the answer tokens, so we can directly test the alignment between answer spans and mag-netic polarity. We do so with the Wilcoxon Signed Rank test, and report the Rank Biserial Correlation to quantify the effect size. This effectively tests if answer tokens are more repelling than non-answer tokens and by how much, and serves to further ex-plore the role of late-layer semantics in the model. While we experiment with fine-tuned (not base) models, we can understand how magnet geometry influences specific linguistic tasks, and speculate at their function, which is undoubtedly useful. For more details on this setup see Appendix E. 

5.2 Findings 

Table 1 and Table 2 show the results of our first line of experiments: causal ablations. We report the classification accuracy on the CoNLL test set for POS tagging, and SST2 test set for sentiment anal-ysis. In Table 1 we see that at these early layers (precisely where the PBC was strongest), ablat-ing the repelling tokens has catastrophic effects on syntax performance (POS), further solidified when compared to the random baseline which yields a comparatively mild impact, despite zeroing-out an [CLS] This is a cap ti vat ing movie that master fully combines stunning visual s , a compelling storyline , and exceptional performances by the cast . The director ' s vision shine s through in every scene , creating an im mers ive experience that keeps the audience engaged from start to finish . A must -watch for cinema enthusiasts ! [SEP] Figure 5: Sentiment Analysis at Layer 10: Attracting tokens are substrings of high sentiment, and in this figure the darkness of the colors are key, not just polarity. Adjectives like stunning , compelling , and exceptional as well as  

> creating an immersive experience

are noticeably darker, indicating they are also more attracting. 

equal number of tokens. For reference, the un-modified accuracy is 91.5%. In comparison, when ablating these early magnets for sentiment classi-fication, a semantic task, the performance impact is much weaker. In this task the unmodified accu-racy is 94.9%. Thus, these early magnets appear to be specially important for syntactic tasks. In Table 2 we see the other half, ablating late-layer at-tracting vectors produces severe drops in semantic performance while the baseline is again much more mild. As expected, ablating these late magnets for POS tagging, a syntactic task, produces negligi-ble performance degradation. This affirms what we hypothesized, that late magnets are especially important for semantics. In Table 3 we report our findings for our second experiment line on the SQuAD validation set. It corroborates what we had initially found (Figure 6): late-layer answer tokens are uniquely delegated as more repelling. This indicates that magnetism clearly separates the answers from the paragraph for question answering, impressive given that an-swer tokens represent less than 3% of all tokens. We also see the pattern peaks at the final layer where we saw that answer tokens were entirely repelling magnets. Accumulating all our results, these findings show that in BERT early-layer mag-nets are crucial for syntactic tasks while late-layer magnets are important for semantic ones, in-line with prior proposed stages of linguistic processing.                  

> Layer Sentiment Classification POS Tagging
> Random Magnet Random Magnet 10.7792 0.6111 0.7398 0.0679 20.8375 0.8083 0.7852 0.1132 30.8958 0.8181 0.8577 0.4274

Table 1: Early-Layer Repelling Magnets Matter for Syntax Effect of zero-ablating an equal number of ran-dom vectors and early-layer repelling vectors on clas-sification accuracy of a syntactic (POS) and semantic (sentiment) task. Early-layer magnets are far more im-portant to the syntactic task.                  

> Layer Sentiment Classification POS Tagging
> Random Magnet Random Magnet 10 0.9167 0.8514 0.9490 0.9490 11 0.9097 0.7625 0.9490 0.9490 12 0.9042 0.6958 0.9291 0.9015

Table 2: Late-Layer Attracting Magnets Matter for Semantics. The effects of zero-ablating an equal num-ber of random vectors and late-layer attracting vectors on classification accuracy of a syntactic (POS) and se-mantic (sentiment) task. These late-layer magnets are far more important to the semantic task.                                  

> Layer Effect Size RBC p−value
> 1−8−−>0.05 91.1197 ×10 7−0.5987 <10 −53
> 10 0.1717 ×10 7−0.9385 <10 −53
> 11 0.1806 ×10 7−0.9353 <10 −53
> 12 0.0028 ×10 7−0.9990 <10 −53

Table 3: QA Magnets Carve Answer Spans. We present the Wilcoxon Signed Rank Test results (lower effect is stronger). In late layers we see extremely sig-nificant correlation, indicating answer tokens are much more repelling than non-answer tokens. 

6 Discussion 

Core Findings Our main findings in subsec-tion 4.2 present some critical takeaways. The first is that magnetic vectors reflect a geometric organization of the representations within language models, one that evolves and transforms through the model (Appendix C) and notably one that is deliberate (see subsection 3.1). The existence of strong magnetism and their consistent patterns across models directly indicates that this geometric structure is likely inherent to transformer language models themselves, and is one of few methods to analyze through vector magnitude alongside angular geometry. Secondly, the fact that magnet strengths and linguistic type exhibit very high PBC scores early on (see Figure 4) indicates that the structure is not only deliberate, but reasonably governed by linguistic principles. [CLS] What injury did the Carolina Panthers lose Ke lvin Benjamin to during their preseason ? [SEP] Despite wa iving longtime running back De A nge lo Williams and losing top wide receiver Ke lvin Benjamin to a torn AC L in the preseason , the Carolina Panthers had their best regular season in franchise history , becoming the seventh team to win at least 15 regular season games since the league expanded to a 16 - game schedule in 1978 . Carolina started the season 14 – 0 , not only setting franchise records for the best start and the longest single - season winning streak , but also posting the best start to a season by an NFC team in NFL history , breaking the 13 – 0 record previously shared with the 2009 New Orleans Saints and the 2011 Green Bay Packers . With their NFC - best 15 – 1 regular season record , the Panthers clinched home - field advantage throughout the NFC playoffs for the first time in franchise history . Ten players were selected to the Pro Bowl ( the most in franchise history ) along with eight All - Pro selections . [SEP] Figure 6: Question Answering at Layer 12: We see the answer tokens ( torn ACL ) are the strongest repelling tokens amongst mainly attracting magnets 

Finding interpretable patterns inside language models is itself difficult especially purely based on hidden space geometry, so this is quite striking. Then there is the connection to prior work, as magnetism presents us with a new way of revisiting the classical NLP pipeline projected onto BERT, where the model abstractly begins with syntax early on then transitions to semantics later. As mentioned we see clear ties to syntactic processing at the early layers of a model (Table 1), followed by a bowtie transition where the model reorganizes vectors (Appendix C), then the end where new magnets are established (Figure 3) with less syntactic separation. Although the late-layer magnets are homogeneous and don’t exhibit the function/content striation, this does not disparage the potential of using magnetism to interpret the model at this stage as they are highly related with specialized downstream tasks. We find these late-layer magnets correspond strongly to semantic tasks in one model (Table 2, Table 3). These results let us reconcile what previous probing results had found, while avoiding the criticisms they faced. Although our other layer-wise patterns extend to all model types, we cannot yet claim other models also exhibit the same strong causal links to downstream performance until they are studied in future work. But in the interim, these results suggest that through magnetism we can begin to piece together the general form of the classical NLP pipeline: layers encode linguistic properties across all models, and within BERT early magnetism is important to syntax while late magnetism is crucial to semantics. 

What Causes Magnetism? It remains to be dis-cussed why this phenomenon arises, especially po-sitioned relative to results in circuit discovery (Yu et al., 2025), computation graphs (Ameisen et al., 2025) and SAE feature discovery (Cunningham et al., 2023). Research (Elhage et al., 2021, 2022) has proposed transformers may read and write to subspaces within the representation space at vari-ous times, plausibly leveraging geometric proper-ties (Sun et al., 2026; Tiblias et al., 2026) to do so. Contrary to the aforementioned pipeline, in their work layer-wise computation does not necessitate some iterative, "bottom-up" approach, but can be composed of disjoint, unordered points of compu-tation. Yet based on our results we posit that gen-eral inherent qualities to language processing, like handling syntax before semantics, remain advanta-geous for a transformer to learn iteratively, whilst simultaneously models indeed may still compute via subspace manipulations. We believe magnetism likely occurs because of how features are dele-gated to token representations and moved around in these manipulations subject to some overarch-ing processes (syntactic or semantic). Given that mechanistically transformers read and write with non-linear projections and residual updates, it’s plausible that repelling magnets let the model re-serve important directions (perhaps features) from others at certain steps to mitigate noise in these read/write operations (making similar directions small or pushing them away). Similarly, attracting magnets may be used for highlighting important directions which need to dominate, making similar directions large. It is still difficult to draw con-clusions, but akin to the intuitive representational geometry in prior work (Tiblias et al., 2026; Sun et al., 2026), we believe some learned geometric or-ganization is leveraged based on unknown features for the model’s computation, and the magnetism phenomena is a remarkable consequence of this. 7 Conclusion 

We have identified new structure in the vector rep-resentations of large language models. Experimen-tally, these vectors reveal layer-wise linguistic pat-terns across model sizes and architectures. We show causal evidence in BERT that early-layer magnets influence a chosen syntactic task more than a chosen semantic/pragmatic task, and vice versa for late-layer magnets. Crucially, this discov-ery was the first to date that was made intrinsically within the model, without probing, letting us reaf-firm the contested results in past work. Beyond this, magnetic vectors offer a new geometric framework for future work in understanding language models. 

Limitations 

We must first highlight that our evidence of mag-netism exhibiting linguistic separation applies only to English models on English tasks. Extending this to other languages is important future work to test whether this finding holds universally. Though our linguistic patterns can be found in not just BERT, but modern model families like Gemma, Qwen, and Llama, our downstream case-studies are restricted only to BERT. As mentioned in the paper, this is because BERT is so extensively cited in the layer-wise approaches that we directly align our findings with. In addition, BERT’s naturally suited tasks of-fer us more linguistic control compared to the tasks suited for decoder models, allowing us to more ac-curately test our hypotheses. We chose these three tasks with BERT because they are well studied and very linguistically aligned (either predominantly syntactic or semantic). It would be perhaps more comprehensive to investigate more nuanced tasks, which we leave as an intended avenue of future work. Lastly, due to the auto-regressive nature of these large models, we needed to leverage a trick to uncover this underlying structure that as of right now causes difficulty in directly adapting our mag-net ablations downstream. However, we assert that the linguistically-guided structure indeed exists in these larger models as shown in our main line of experimentation. We view that our rigorous experiments with BERT are a necessary foundational step, well-situated in re-lated interpretability literature, to validate this new-found phenomenon downstream. After laying the groundwork, we leave leveraging this structure on decoder models and conducting similar investiga-tions into their downstream effects to future work. Finally, while we connect our finding to other works in interpretability in a speculative way, we do not have a concrete explanation for why this phenomenon occurs. What we have done is com-prehensively establish that this structure has unde-niable ties to linguistic processing across a wide range of models. We leave an investigation of what causes these vectors to appear to future work. 

References                

> Emmanuel Ameisen, Jack Lindsey, Adam Pearce, Wes Gurnee, Nicholas L. Turner, Brian Chen, Craig Citro, David Abrahams, Shan Carter, Basil Hosmer, Jonathan Marcus, Michael Sklar, Adly Templeton, Trenton Bricken, Callum McDougall, Hoagy Cun-ningham, Thomas Henighan, Adam Jermyn, Andy Jones, and 8 others. 2025. Circuit tracing: Revealing computational graphs in language models. Trans-former Circuits Thread .Arthur Conmy, Augustine Mavor-Parker, Aengus Lynch, Stefan Heimersheim, and Adrià Garriga-Alonso. 2023. Towards automated circuit discovery for mech-anistic interpretability. In Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , volume 36, pages 16318– 16352. Curran Associates, Inc. Hoagy Cunningham, Aidan Ewart, Logan Riggs, Robert Huben, and Lee Sharkey. 2023. Sparse autoencoders find highly interpretable features in language models.
> Preprint , arXiv:2309.08600. Damai Dai, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Zhifang Sui, Baobao Chang, and Furu Wei. 2022. Knowledge neurons in pretrained transformers. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 8493– 8502, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language under-standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computational Linguistics. Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Catherine Olsson, Nicholas Schiefer, Tom Henighan, Shauna Kravec, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Robert Lasenby, Dawn Drain, Carol Chen, Roger Grosse, Sam McCandlish, Jared Kaplan, Dario Amodei, Martin Wattenberg, and Christopher Olah. 2022. Toy models of superpo-sition. Preprint , arXiv:2209.10652. Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly,

Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane Lovitt, Kamal Ndousse, and 6 others. 2021. A mathemati-cal framework for transformer circuits. Trans-former Circuits Thread . Https://transformer-circuits.pub/2021/framework/index.html. Joshua Engels, Eric J Michaud, Isaac Liao, Wes Gurnee, and Max Tegmark. 2025. Not all language model fea-tures are one-dimensionally linear. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Kawin Ethayarajh. 2019. How contextual are contextu-alized word representations? Comparing the geom-etry of BERT, ELMo, and GPT-2 embeddings. In 

Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-guage Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 55–65, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schel-ten, Alex Vaughan, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mi-tra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark, and 542 others. 2024. The llama 3 herd of models. Preprint , arXiv:2407.21783. Roger Grosse, Juhan Bae, Cem Anil, Nelson Elhage, Alex Tamkin, Amirhossein Tajdini, Benoit Steiner, Dustin Li, Esin Durmus, Ethan Perez, and 1 oth-ers. 2023. Studying large language model gener-alization with influence functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03296 .Wes Gurnee and Max Tegmark. 2024. Language mod-els represent space and time. In The Twelfth Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations .John Hewitt and Christopher D. Manning. 2019. Astructural probe for finding syntax in word represen-tations. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages 4129–4138, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computational Linguistics. Ganesh Jawahar, Benoît Sagot, and Djamé Seddah. 2019. What does BERT learn about the structure of language? In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,pages 3651–3657, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics. Rishi Jha, Collin Zhang, Vitaly Shmatikov, and John Morris. 2025. Harnessing the universal geometry of embeddings. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 38, pages 45963–45987. Curran Associates, Inc. Andrew Lee, Melanie Weber, Fernanda Viégas, and Martin Wattenberg. 2025. Shared global and local geometry of language model embeddings. Preprint ,arXiv:2503.21073. Yaniv Leviathan, Matan Kalman, and Yossi Matias. 2025. Prompt repetition improves non-reasoning llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.14982 .Andrew Liu and Gerald Penn. 2025. Similarity, transfor-mation and the newly found invariance of influence functions. In Proceedings of the Society for Compu-tation in Linguistics 2025 , pages 309–321, Eugene, Oregon. Association for Computational Linguistics. Tomáš Mikolov, Wen-tau Yih, and Geoffrey Zweig. 2013. Linguistic regularities in continuous space word representations. In Proceedings of the 2013 conference of the north american chapter of the as-sociation for computational linguistics: Human lan-guage technologies , pages 746–751. Jingcheng Niu, Andrew Liu, Zining Zhu, and Gerald Penn. 2024. What does the knowledge neuron thesis have to do with knowledge? In The Twelfth Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations .Jingcheng Niu, Wenjie Lu, and Gerald Penn. 2022. Does BERT rediscover a classical NLP pipeline? In 

Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Computational Linguistics , pages 3143–3153, Gyeongju, Republic of Korea. International Com-mittee on Computational Linguistics. Kiho Park, Yo Joong Choe, Yibo Jiang, and Victor Veitch. 2025. The geometry of categorical and hier-archical concepts in large language models. In In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations ,volume 2025, pages 76441–76463. Kiho Park, Yo Joong Choe, and Victor Veitch. 2024. The linear representation hypothesis and the geometry of large language models. Preprint ,arXiv:2311.03658. Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. 2019. Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. 2016. SQuAD: 100,000+ questions for machine comprehension of text. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-ral Language Processing , pages 2383–2392, Austin, Texas. Association for Computational Linguistics. Bastian Rieck, Matteo Togninalli, Christian Bock, Michael Moor, Max Horn, Thomas Gumbsch, and Karsten Borgwardt. 2019. Neural persistence: A complexity measure for deep neural networks using algebraic topology. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Wu, Jason Chuang, Christopher D. Manning, Andrew Ng, and Christopher Potts. 2013. Recursive deep models for semantic compositionality over a sentiment treebank. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empiri-cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 1631–1642, Seattle, Washington, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Lihao Sun, Lewen Yan, Xiaoya Lu, Andrew Lee, Jie Zhang, and Jing Shao. 2026. Valence-arousal sub-space in llms: Circular emotion geometry and multi-behavioral control. Preprint , arXiv:2604.03147. Gemma Team, Aishwarya Kamath, Johan Ferret, Shreya Pathak, Nino Vieillard, Ramona Merhej, Sarah Perrin, Tatiana Matejovicova, Alexandre Ramé, Morgane Rivière, Louis Rouillard, Thomas Mesnard, Geoffrey Cideron, Jean bastien Grill, Sabela Ramos, Edouard Yvinec, Michelle Casbon, Etienne Pot, Ivo Penchev, and 197 others. 2025. Gemma 3 technical report. 

Preprint , arXiv:2503.19786. Adly Templeton, Tom Conerly, Jonathan Marcus, Jack Lindsey, Trenton Bricken, Brian Chen, Adam Pearce, Craig Citro, Emmanuel Ameisen, Andy Jones, Hoagy Cunningham, Nicholas L Turner, Callum McDougall, Monte MacDiarmid, C. Daniel Freeman, Theodore R. Sumers, Edward Rees, Joshua Batson, Adam Jermyn, and 3 others. 2024. Scaling monosemanticity: Ex-tracting interpretable features from claude 3 sonnet. 

Transformer Circuits Thread .Ian Tenney, Dipanjan Das, and Ellie Pavlick. 2019. BERT rediscovers the classical NLP pipeline. In 

Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics , pages 4593– 4601, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics. Federico Tiblias, Irina Bigoulaeva, Jingcheng Niu, Simone Balloccu, and Iryna Gurevych. 2026. Hypothesis-driven feature manifold analysis in llms via supervised multi-dimensional scaling. Preprint ,arXiv:2510.01025. Erik F. Tjong Kim Sang and Fien De Meulder. 2003. Introduction to the CoNLL-2003 shared task: Language-independent named entity recognition. In 

Proceedings of the Seventh Conference on Natural Language Learning at HLT-NAACL 2003 , pages 142– 147. Kevin Ro Wang, Alexandre Variengien, Arthur Conmy, Buck Shlegeris, and Jacob Steinhardt. 2023. Inter-pretability in the wild: a circuit for indirect object identification in GPT-2 small. In The Eleventh Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations .Qwen An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Guanting Dong, Hao-ran Wei, Huan Lin, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxin Yang, Jingren Zhou, Jun-yang Lin, and 25 others. 2024. Qwen2.5 technical report. ArXiv , abs/2412.15115. Lei Yu, Jingcheng Niu, Zining Zhu, Xi Chen, and Gerald Penn. 2025. Sheaf discovery with joint computation graph pruning and flexible granularity. In Proceed-ings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 8822–8837, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. 

A Magnetic Vector Implementation Details 

While on paper identifying magnetic vectors re-quires performing linear regression for each token in an input sequence, this can be done in parallel as the problem reduces to a single least squares ma-trix equation, allowing for efficient runtime even on very large models. This implementation, and all experiments are available in our repository. Furthermore magnetism is assessed across to-kens not words, which includes special tokens. This makes it easily adaptable to any model and tok-enization architecture. 

B Dataset Curation 

Collection We hand craft a dataset of 100 para-graphs by sampling documents online from the following general domains: Sports, Politics, His-tory, Medicine, News, Technology, and Science. We searched each topic online looking for well formatted paragraphs representing complete ideas. All data was collected by our research team, with no external help or annotators, and was collected from freely available online sources. 

Purpose The intention was to have no bias in how this data was collected so as to honestly survey natural language across a wide variety of differing domains that compose the English language online, as this is what modern models are trained on. Re-call from our experimental setup (subsection 4.1) that we tag each word with it’s part-of-speech cat-egory. However, magnets operate on tokens not words, so this meant that for some tokenizers, we had to manually align each token with the word, so we can infer the relevant token-level label from the base word’s label. Recall the label is constructed from the part-of-speech category: 0 for function and 1 for content. This alignment was laborious, which is why our dataset is the size it is. How-ever, given it’s size and sparsity across all natural language and starkly different domains, the fact that we observe a strong unanimous pattern across model families, and model sizes, solidifies our re-sults as an inherent property to transformer-based language modelling. C Magnet Polarity Transition Across Layers 

We present the change in the polarity counts of mag-nets across our dataset as we move deeper through the model. We see in Figure 7 that for all our mod-els, there is a clear general pattern present. 

Early Layers In the early layer we see a domi-nation of repelling vectors, with some models like GPT2 and Qwen2.5 maintaining this one-sided be-haviour for most of the layers. Our results in sub-section 4.2 demonstrated that at the early layers (not all layers where repelling vectors are present), the polarity of these magnets identify function and content tokens, indicating a syntactic striation. Note that the counts in these figures do not incor-porate magnet strength, so indeed many of the re-pelling and attracting vectors may be weak. 

Transition In the middle of these layers we see consistent reorganization. Especially in the larger models (Qwen, Llama, and Gemma) we see transi-tions between the dominating polarity, and in some cases a reversion happens multiple times as with Gemma. We refer to these transitions as a bowtie 

effect (based on the graph shape). However the characteristic of each bowtie is unique to the model, and given our downstream results with BERT (sub-section 5.2), this has an interesting implication. As we saw with BERT, early-layer repelling magnets, and late-layer magnets (of both polarities) had im-portance on specific linguistic tasks. In the case of these transitions, we see they are often gradual (not usually sporadic between adjacent layers), which suggests to us that this reorganization is deliber-ate, and optimistically, perhaps a reflection of some specific linguistic task at that period in the model. It is also possible that these nuanced transitions are a reflection of intricate differences in model archi-tectures. This is all of course speculation, based on the results we observe so far. As mentioned in our experiments (section 5) we seldom see any strong magnets in the middle lay-ers of BERT, thus we cannot use similar causal ablations to understand that transition. Further-more, adapting our ablations to decoder models with tasks of similar linguistic granularity stand as an intended avenue for future work. 

Establishment At the final layers, with the ex-clusion of Qwen, we see establishment of one mag-net polarity. We believe this may be due to the language modelling heads (projections, classifiers, etc.) atop the transformer layers which warrants some kind of hidden space geometric stabilization before prediction. Of course this is a hypothesis, and further work is needed to better understand the behaviour. 

D Special Consideration for Decoder Models 

We present solutions we had tried to mitigate the auto-regressive problem in order to allow our mag-net calculations to be applied to decoder models. One possible tweak would be to calculate the re-gression score backwards, that is between angles and norms for every token in the sequence prior to the candidate magnet token. This is effectively ap-plying the causal mask on our magnet calculation. However, this suffers from a new issue, since ear-lier tokens have far fewer other tokens that need to be considered, which skews the regression scores in a way that is not intuitively reconcilable. To remedy this, we use an idea from Leviathan et al. (2025) involving giving an input twice to a model. As such, the token representations of the second instance are imbued with information about the other tokens in the input. Specifically, for each paragraph we append it to itself before giving it to GPT2, Qwen2.5, Gemma3, and Llama3.2. We then exclusively look at the representations of the second half of the input and run our magnet calcu-lations the normal way, no causal masking needed, ignoring the original instance in the sample. This allows us to keep balanced counts for each token while also ensuring each token has meaningfully seen the other tokens in the sequence. 

E BERT Downstream Tasks 

See Figure 8 for another question answering exam-ple, and Figure 9 for another sentiment analysis example. Below we will overview some technical details regarding Question Answering and the sig-nificance testing. For all tasks we train according to prior research to reach competitive accuracies. We train on a local cluster of Nvidia 24GB L4 GPUs using 2 to 4 depending on the task. 

Details Question Answering is a unique task. The model uses a classification head on top of BERT that outputs two logits, S, E , over the input sequence. These logits correspond to each token being the start and end of the answer span respec-tively. It is our job then to decode the answer from 2 4 6 8 10 12 Layers 02000 4000 6000 8000 10000 Counts                       

> Magnet Polarities Across Layers for BERT
> Attracting Repelling 246810 12 Layers 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 Counts
> Magnet Polarities Across Layers for GPT2
> Attracting Repelling 0510 15 20 25 30 35 Layers 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 Counts
> Magnet Polarities Across Layers for Qwen2.5
> Attracting Repelling 0510 15 20 25 Layers 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 Counts
> Magnet Polarities Across Layers for Gemma3
> Attracting Repelling 0510 15 20 25 Layers 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 Counts
> Magnet Polarities Across Layers for Llama3.2
> Attracting Repelling

Figure 7: Transition in magnet polarity moving across layers. The solid line represents the number of repelling vectors in the entire dataset, the dashed one represents attracting. We observe a bowtie effect phenomenon indicating a transitionary period for all models. Note this counts the number of negative and positive magnets, but does not include their strengths. 

these two logit series, where in practice we use the native implementation given by HuggingFace. 

Ablations vs. Statistical Testing In the case of question answering, since we know the answer tokens, computing a correlation is better suited than ablations. In tasks like POS or sentiment analysis, it’s unclear what tokens contribute to the final classification and how they interact with each other. For example, consider the sentiment of the sample The play is not good . Does good only matter? How does not affect the other tokens? Or in POS, how does a tagger determine the tags for 

watch and play in We watch the play , as they can be verbs or nouns. In this foggy attribution situation, causal ablations let us confidently conclude that magnetism is relevant. However with QA, we observed that magnetism carves out the answers, so if we zero-ablate those tokens, was it the magnetism that mattered or trivially the tokens themselves, because obviously the model cannot answer the question without the answer context. These results would be inconclusive. But, the fact that it’s carved out is what’s significant, and it would be best to directly measure this carving. This is what our significance testing accomplishes. 

Wilcoxon Test To test that answer tokens are more repelling than non-answer tokens we use the Wilcoxon Signed Rank Test (Wilcoxon), and the Rank Biserial Correlation (RBC) to quantify effect size. The Wilcoxon test returns us W +, W − which is the sum of signed ranks for the positive and negative differences, where here W + is the effect size and we expect it to be low (the null hypothesis being that they are equal). We can quantify the difference by taking the RBC given by W +−W −

W ++W −

to see how asymmetrical they are. The RBC is bounded between [−1, 1] , and we hope to observe a negative correlation, which we do. 

F Function and Content Separation Figures 

See the figures below, Figure 10 to Figure 17 for more linguistic striation and model processing ex-amples. The layers are chosen arbitrarily, roughly evenly spaced to demonstrate transitions through-out the model. "[CLS] How many companies were listed on the W SE on August 2009 ? [SEP] Warsaw ' s first stock exchange was established in 1817 and continued trading until World War II . It was re - established in April 1991 , following the end of the post - war communist control of the country and the re int rod uction of a free - market economy . T oday , the Warsaw Stock Exchange ( W SE ) is , according to many indicators , the largest market in the region , with 37 4 companies listed and total capital ization of 162 58 4 m ln EU R as of 31 August 2009 . From 1991 until 2000 , the stock exchange was , ironic ally , located in the building previously used as the headquarters of the Polish United Workers ' Party ( P Z PR ) . [SEP] " Figure 8: A layer 12 example of BERT for question answering, where the answer is 374 . Here we see clear answer carving in 374 companies listed , where other numbers are also considered as repelling magnets. [CLS] The financial markets faced a turbulent session today , as major in ##dices p ##lum ##met ##ed amidst growing fears of economic instability . In ##ves ##tors were rattled by a combination of disappointing corporate earnings , rising inflation ##ary pressures , and uncertainty surrounding global trade policies . The sell - off was broad - based , with technology , financial , and energy sectors bearing the br ##unt of the decline . Ana ##ly ##sts pointed to a sharp rise in bond yields as a contributing factor , which further damp ##ened investor sentiment . Market participants are now closely watching upcoming economic data and central bank decisions for signs of potential recovery or further vol ##ati ##lity . [SEP] [CLS] The financial markets faced a turbulent session today , as major in ##dices p ##lum ##met ##ed amidst growing fears of economic instability . In ##ves ##tors were rattled by a combination of disappointing corporate earnings , rising inflation ##ary pressures , and uncertainty surrounding global trade policies . The sell - off was broad - based , with technology , financial , and energy sectors bearing the br ##unt of the decline . Ana ##ly ##sts pointed to a sharp rise in bond yields as a contributing factor , which further damp ##ened investor sentiment . Market participants are now closely watching upcoming economic data and central bank decisions for signs of potential recovery or further vol ##ati ##lity . [SEP] 

Figure 9: Layers 10 and 11 in BERT for sentiment classification, we see the white font text (corresponding to the strongest magnets) are often sentimental adjectives like turbulent , major , instability , disappointing , sharp rise .Here the sentiment is negative, correctly classified by the model. "Ar ts and crafts have a long history in China . Thousands of years ago the Chinese were some of the first people to use silk , j ade , bronze , wood , and paper to make art . The artistic writing called call igraph y was invented in China . Much of China 's modern beliefs and philosophies are based on the teachings of a government official who lived nearly 3000 years ago . Kong f uz i , also known as Conf u cius , taught people the value of such things as morality , kindness , and education . " "Ar ts and crafts have a long history in China . Thousands of years ago the Chinese were some of the first people to use silk , j ade , bronze , wood , and paper to make art . The artistic writing called call igraph y was invented in China . Much of China 's modern beliefs and philosophies are based on the teachings of a government official who lived nearly 3000 years ago . Kong f uz i , also known as Conf u cius , taught people the value of such things as morality , kindness , and education . " "Ar ts and crafts have a long history in China . Thousands of years ago the Chinese were some of the first people to use silk , j ade , bronze , wood , and paper to make art . The artistic writing called call igraph y was invented in China . Much of China 's modern beliefs and philosophies are based on the teachings of a government official who lived nearly 3000 years ago . Kong f uz i , also known as Conf u cius , taught people the value of such things as morality , kindness , and education . " "Ar ts and crafts have a long history in China . Thousands of years ago the Chinese were some of the first people to use silk , j ade , bronze , wood , and paper to make art . The artistic writing called call igraph y was invented in China . Much of China 's modern beliefs and philosophies are based on the teachings of a government official who lived nearly 3000 years ago . Kong f uz i , also known as Conf u cius , taught people the value of such things as morality , kindness , and education . " 

Layer 11 

Layer 8 

Layer 5 

Layer 2 

Figure 10: Example of GPT2 "The United States of America is the world 's third largest country in size and nearly the third largest in terms of population . Located in North America , the country is b ordered on the west by the Pacific Ocean and to the east by the Atlantic Ocean . Along the northern border is Canada and the southern border is Mexico . There are 50 states and the District of Columbia . More than twice the size of the European Union , the United States has high mountains in the West and a vast central plain . " "The United States of America is the world 's third largest country in size and nearly the third largest in terms of population . Located in North America , the country is b ordered on the west by the Pacific Ocean and to the east by the Atlantic Ocean . Along the northern border is Canada and the southern border is Mexico . There are 50 states and the District of Columbia . More than twice the size of the European Union , the United States has high mountains in the West and a vast central plain . " "The United States of America is the world 's third largest country in size and nearly the third largest in terms of population . Located in North America , the country is b ordered on the west by the Pacific Ocean and to the east by the Atlantic Ocean . Along the northern border is Canada and the southern border is Mexico . There are 50 states and the District of Columbia . More than twice the size of the European Union , the United States has high mountains in the West and a vast central plain . " "The United States of America is the world 's third largest country in size and nearly the third largest in terms of population . Located in North America , the country is b ordered on the west by the Pacific Ocean and to the east by the Atlantic Ocean . Along the northern border is Canada and the southern border is Mexico . There are 50 states and the District of Columbia . More than twice the size of the European Union , the United States has high mountains in the West and a vast central plain . " 

Layer 11 

Layer 8 

Layer 5 

Layer 2 Figure 11: Example of GPT2 "Trump later said the Lebanese government would begin working with Hezbollah to achieve that goal . The Lebanese Ministry of Public Health said strikes killed nine people across the southern district of Ty re over the past two days , including a param edic . At least eight people were killed and 33 others wounded in an Israeli strike on the town of Gh az iy eh in the Z ahr ani area of southern Lebanon on Thursday , Lebanon âĢĻs state news agency N NA reported . Sal am also offered prayers for those killed and expressed hope that the more than one million people forced from their homes by Israel âĢĻs campaign would be able to return " as soon as possible ." Trump said he would invite Netanyahu and A oun to direct talks , saying both sides wanted to resolve their differences and he believed âĢľ that will happen quickly .âĢĿ " "Trump later said the Lebanese government would begin working with Hezbollah to achieve that goal . The Lebanese Ministry of Public Health said strikes killed nine people across the southern district of Ty re over the past two days , including a param edic . At least eight people were killed and 33 others wounded in an Israeli strike on the town of Gh az iy eh in the Z ahr ani area of southern Lebanon on Thursday , Lebanon âĢĻs state news agency N NA reported . Sal am also offered prayers for those killed and expressed hope that the more than one million people forced from their homes by Israel âĢĻs campaign would be able to return " as soon as possible ." Trump said he would invite Netanyahu and A oun to direct talks , saying both sides wanted to resolve their differences and he believed âĢľ that will happen quickly .âĢĿ " "Trump later said the Lebanese government would begin working with Hezbollah to achieve that goal . The Lebanese Ministry of Public Health said strikes killed nine people across the southern district of Ty re over the past two days , including a param edic . At least eight people were killed and 33 others wounded in an Israeli strike on the town of Gh az iy eh in the Z ahr ani area of southern Lebanon on Thursday , Lebanon âĢĻs state news agency N NA reported . Sal am also offered prayers for those killed and expressed hope that the more than one million people forced from their homes by Israel âĢĻs campaign would be able to return " as soon as possible ." Trump said he would invite Netanyahu and A oun to direct talks , saying both sides wanted to resolve their differences and he believed âĢľ that will happen quickly .âĢĿ " "Trump later said the Lebanese government would begin working with Hezbollah to achieve that goal . The Lebanese Ministry of Public Health said strikes killed nine people across the southern district of Ty re over the past two days , including a param edic . At least eight people were killed and 33 others wounded in an Israeli strike on the town of Gh az iy eh in the Z ahr ani area of southern Lebanon on Thursday , Lebanon âĢĻs state news agency N NA reported . Sal am also offered prayers for those killed and expressed hope that the more than one million people forced from their homes by Israel âĢĻs campaign would be able to return " as soon as possible ." Trump said he would invite Netanyahu and A oun to direct talks , saying both sides wanted to resolve their differences and he believed âĢľ that will happen quickly .âĢĿ " "Trump later said the Lebanese government would begin working with Hezbollah to achieve that goal . The Lebanese Ministry of Public Health said strikes killed nine people across the southern district of Ty re over the past two days , including a param edic . At least eight people were killed and 33 others wounded in an Israeli strike on the town of Gh az iy eh in the Z ahr ani area of southern Lebanon on Thursday , Lebanon âĢĻs state news agency N NA reported . Sal am also offered prayers for those killed and expressed hope that the more than one million people forced from their homes by Israel âĢĻs campaign would be able to return " as soon as possible ." Trump said he would invite Netanyahu and A oun to direct talks , saying both sides wanted to resolve their differences and he believed âĢľ that will happen quickly .âĢĿ " 

Layer 14 

Layer 8 

Layer 1 

Layer 22 

Layer 28 Figure 12: Example of Llama3.2 "The NBA 's collective bargaining agreement includes an " extra ordinary circumstances " clause that a player can use to petition to make the ballot if he falls short of the 65 game minimum . " The NBA and NB PA agreed that , taking into account the tot ality of the circumstances for Cunningham and Don Äį iÄĩ , each player qualified for awards ," the league and union said in a statement . Don c ic played 64 games during the regular season , but he missed two games in December due to traveling for the birth of his child abroad . " "The NBA 's collective bargaining agreement includes an " extra ordinary circumstances " clause that a player can use to petition to make the ballot if he falls short of the 65 game minimum . " The NBA and NB PA agreed that , taking into account the tot ality of the circumstances for Cunningham and Don Äį iÄĩ , each player qualified for awards ," the league and union said in a statement . Don c ic played 64 games during the regular season , but he missed two games in December due to traveling for the birth of his child abroad . " "The NBA 's collective bargaining agreement includes an " extra ordinary circumstances " clause that a player can use to petition to make the ballot if he falls short of the 65 game minimum . " The NBA and NB PA agreed that , taking into account the tot ality of the circumstances for Cunningham and Don Äį iÄĩ , each player qualified for awards ," the league and union said in a statement . Don c ic played 64 games during the regular season , but he missed two games in December due to traveling for the birth of his child abroad . " "The NBA 's collective bargaining agreement includes an " extra ordinary circumstances " clause that a player can use to petition to make the ballot if he falls short of the 65 game minimum . " The NBA and NB PA agreed that , taking into account the tot ality of the circumstances for Cunningham and Don Äį iÄĩ , each player qualified for awards ," the league and union said in a statement . Don c ic played 64 games during the regular season , but he missed two games in December due to traveling for the birth of his child abroad . " "The NBA 's collective bargaining agreement includes an " extra ordinary circumstances " clause that a player can use to petition to make the ballot if he falls short of the 65 game minimum . " The NBA and NB PA agreed that , taking into account the tot ality of the circumstances for Cunningham and Don Äį iÄĩ , each player qualified for awards ," the league and union said in a statement . Don c ic played 64 games during the regular season , but he missed two games in December due to traveling for the birth of his child abroad . " 

Layer 14 

Layer 8 

Layer 1 

Layer 22 

Layer 28 Figure 13: Example of Llama3.2 "Risk factors for diabetes depend on the type of diabetes . Family history may play a part in all types . Environmental factors and geography can add to the risk of type 1 diabetes . Sometimes family members of people with type 1 diabetes are tested for the presence of diabetes immune system cells auto ant ib odies . If you have these auto ant ib odies , you have an increased risk of developing type 1 diabetes . But not everyone who has these auto ant ib odies develops diabetes . " "Risk factors for diabetes depend on the type of diabetes . Family history may play a part in all types . Environmental factors and geography can add to the risk of type 1 diabetes . Sometimes family members of people with type 1 diabetes are tested for the presence of diabetes immune system cells auto ant ib odies . If you have these auto ant ib odies , you have an increased risk of developing type 1 diabetes . But not everyone who has these auto ant ib odies develops diabetes . " "Risk factors for diabetes depend on the type of diabetes . Family history may play a part in all types . Environmental factors and geography can add to the risk of type 1 diabetes . Sometimes family members of people with type 1 diabetes are tested for the presence of diabetes immune system cells auto ant ib odies . If you have these auto ant ib odies , you have an increased risk of developing type 1 diabetes . But not everyone who has these auto ant ib odies develops diabetes . " "Risk factors for diabetes depend on the type of diabetes . Family history may play a part in all types . Environmental factors and geography can add to the risk of type 1 diabetes . Sometimes family members of people with type 1 diabetes are tested for the presence of diabetes immune system cells auto ant ib odies . If you have these auto ant ib odies , you have an increased risk of developing type 1 diabetes . But not everyone who has these auto ant ib odies develops diabetes . " "Risk factors for diabetes depend on the type of diabetes . Family history may play a part in all types . Environmental factors and geography can add to the risk of type 1 diabetes . Sometimes family members of people with type 1 diabetes are tested for the presence of diabetes immune system cells auto ant ib odies . If you have these auto ant ib odies , you have an increased risk of developing type 1 diabetes . But not everyone who has these auto ant ib odies develops diabetes . " "Risk factors for diabetes depend on the type of diabetes . Family history may play a part in all types . Environmental factors and geography can add to the risk of type 1 diabetes . Sometimes family members of people with type 1 diabetes are tested for the presence of diabetes immune system cells auto ant ib odies . If you have these auto ant ib odies , you have an increased risk of developing type 1 diabetes . But not everyone who has these auto ant ib odies develops diabetes . " 

Layer 23 

Layer 16 

Layer 9 

Layer 2 

Layer 30 

Layer 36 

Figure 14: Example of Qwen2.5 "A jury in New York deliber ated for four days before reaching its decision . State attorneys general who sued Live Nation said the verdict could potentially lead to lower ticket prices for music fans . Live Nation said in a statement that the verdict âĢľ is not the last word on this matter .âĢĿ The company predicted that once a remedy phase of the litigation is completed before the judge and all appeals are resolved , the outcome likely won âĢĻt be much different from what the federal government achieved with a settlement it reached with the company just after the trial began . " "A jury in New York deliber ated for four days before reaching its decision . State attorneys general who sued Live Nation said the verdict could potentially lead to lower ticket prices for music fans . Live Nation said in a statement that the verdict âĢľ is not the last word on this matter .âĢĿ The company predicted that once a remedy phase of the litigation is completed before the judge and all appeals are resolved , the outcome likely won âĢĻt be much different from what the federal government achieved with a settlement it reached with the company just after the trial began . " "A jury in New York deliber ated for four days before reaching its decision . State attorneys general who sued Live Nation said the verdict could potentially lead to lower ticket prices for music fans . Live Nation said in a statement that the verdict âĢľ is not the last word on this matter .âĢĿ The company predicted that once a remedy phase of the litigation is completed before the judge and all appeals are resolved , the outcome likely won âĢĻt be much different from what the federal government achieved with a settlement it reached with the company just after the trial began . " "A jury in New York deliber ated for four days before reaching its decision . State attorneys general who sued Live Nation said the verdict could potentially lead to lower ticket prices for music fans . Live Nation said in a statement that the verdict âĢľ is not the last word on this matter .âĢĿ The company predicted that once a remedy phase of the litigation is completed before the judge and all appeals are resolved , the outcome likely won âĢĻt be much different from what the federal government achieved with a settlement it reached with the company just after the trial began . " "A jury in New York deliber ated for four days before reaching its decision . State attorneys general who sued Live Nation said the verdict could potentially lead to lower ticket prices for music fans . Live Nation said in a statement that the verdict âĢľ is not the last word on this matter .âĢĿ The company predicted that once a remedy phase of the litigation is completed before the judge and all appeals are resolved , the outcome likely won âĢĻt be much different from what the federal government achieved with a settlement it reached with the company just after the trial began . " "A jury in New York deliber ated for four days before reaching its decision . State attorneys general who sued Live Nation said the verdict could potentially lead to lower ticket prices for music fans . Live Nation said in a statement that the verdict âĢľ is not the last word on this matter .âĢĿ The company predicted that once a remedy phase of the litigation is completed before the judge and all appeals are resolved , the outcome likely won âĢĻt be much different from what the federal government achieved with a settlement it reached with the company just after the trial began . " 

Layer 23 

Layer 16 

Layer 9 

Layer 2 

Layer 30 

Layer 36 Figure 15: Example of Qwen2.5 "The Blue Jays still need to see how Yes avage recovers from this outing , and they expect to be closer to a decision to bring him back by Friday , but in terms of the baseline numbers , everything is right where it needs to be . If Yes avage gets the green light , he could rejoin the Blue Jays on this road trip and line up to pitch in the Angels series early next week . “ That ’ s definitely a possibility ,” manager John Schneider said Tuesday . “ Whenever you ’ re getting close , you don ’ t want to be too knee jerky , but he ’ s ch amping at the bit and it ’ s right in line with what we ’ d thought .” " "The Blue Jays still need to see how Yes avage recovers from this outing , and they expect to be closer to a decision to bring him back by Friday , but in terms of the baseline numbers , everything is right where it needs to be . If Yes avage gets the green light , he could rejoin the Blue Jays on this road trip and line up to pitch in the Angels series early next week . “ That ’ s definitely a possibility ,” manager John Schneider said Tuesday . “ Whenever you ’ re getting close , you don ’ t want to be too knee jerky , but he ’ s ch amping at the bit and it ’ s right in line with what we ’ d thought .” " "The Blue Jays still need to see how Yes avage recovers from this outing , and they expect to be closer to a decision to bring him back by Friday , but in terms of the baseline numbers , everything is right where it needs to be . If Yes avage gets the green light , he could rejoin the Blue Jays on this road trip and line up to pitch in the Angels series early next week . “ That ’ s definitely a possibility ,” manager John Schneider said Tuesday . “ Whenever you ’ re getting close , you don ’ t want to be too knee jerky , but he ’ s ch amping at the bit and it ’ s right in line with what we ’ d thought .” " "The Blue Jays still need to see how Yes avage recovers from this outing , and they expect to be closer to a decision to bring him back by Friday , but in terms of the baseline numbers , everything is right where it needs to be . If Yes avage gets the green light , he could rejoin the Blue Jays on this road trip and line up to pitch in the Angels series early next week . “ That ’ s definitely a possibility ,” manager John Schneider said Tuesday . “ Whenever you ’ re getting close , you don ’ t want to be too knee jerky , but he ’ s ch amping at the bit and it ’ s right in line with what we ’ d thought .” " "The Blue Jays still need to see how Yes avage recovers from this outing , and they expect to be closer to a decision to bring him back by Friday , but in terms of the baseline numbers , everything is right where it needs to be . If Yes avage gets the green light , he could rejoin the Blue Jays on this road trip and line up to pitch in the Angels series early next week . “ That ’ s definitely a possibility ,” manager John Schneider said Tuesday . “ Whenever you ’ re getting close , you don ’ t want to be too knee jerky , but he ’ s ch amping at the bit and it ’ s right in line with what we ’ d thought .” " 

Layer 13 

Layer 7 

Layer 1 

Layer 19 

Layer 26 Figure 16: Example of Gemma3 "On the night of 3 1 October 1 9 2 0 , Frederick B anting wrote down an idea that set him on the path to the discovery of insulin . He had just read a routine article in a medical journal while preparing a talk to medical students . His idea concerned research to isolate an internal secretion of the pancreas that might prove to be a cure for diabetes . This substance had long been sought by other researchers . The next morning , he discussed the idea with FR Miller , a professor of physiology at Western . Miller advised him to seek support for his proposed research at the University of T oronto . On 1 7 May 1 9 2 1 , B anting began work under the direction of Professor JJ R Mac le od and assisted by Charles Best . " "On the night of 3 1 October 1 9 2 0 , Frederick B anting wrote down an idea that set him on the path to the discovery of insulin . He had just read a routine article in a medical journal while preparing a talk to medical students . His idea concerned research to isolate an internal secretion of the pancreas that might prove to be a cure for diabetes . This substance had long been sought by other researchers . The next morning , he discussed the idea with FR Miller , a professor of physiology at Western . Miller advised him to seek support for his proposed research at the University of T oronto . On 1 7 May 1 9 2 1 , B anting began work under the direction of Professor JJ R Mac le od and assisted by Charles Best . " "On the night of 3 1 October 1 9 2 0 , Frederick B anting wrote down an idea that set him on the path to the discovery of insulin . He had just read a routine article in a medical journal while preparing a talk to medical students . His idea concerned research to isolate an internal secretion of the pancreas that might prove to be a cure for diabetes . This substance had long been sought by other researchers . The next morning , he discussed the idea with FR Miller , a professor of physiology at Western . Miller advised him to seek support for his proposed research at the University of T oronto . On 1 7 May 1 9 2 1 , B anting began work under the direction of Professor JJ R Mac le od and assisted by Charles Best . " "On the night of 3 1 October 1 9 2 0 , Frederick B anting wrote down an idea that set him on the path to the discovery of insulin . He had just read a routine article in a medical journal while preparing a talk to medical students . His idea concerned research to isolate an internal secretion of the pancreas that might prove to be a cure for diabetes . This substance had long been sought by other researchers . The next morning , he discussed the idea with FR Miller , a professor of physiology at Western . Miller advised him to seek support for his proposed research at the University of T oronto . On 1 7 May 1 9 2 1 , B anting began work under the direction of Professor JJ R Mac le od and assisted by Charles Best . " "On the night of 3 1 October 1 9 2 0 , Frederick B anting wrote down an idea that set him on the path to the discovery of insulin . He had just read a routine article in a medical journal while preparing a talk to medical students . His idea concerned research to isolate an internal secretion of the pancreas that might prove to be a cure for diabetes . This substance had long been sought by other researchers . The next morning , he discussed the idea with FR Miller , a professor of physiology at Western . Miller advised him to seek support for his proposed research at the University of T oronto . On 1 7 May 1 9 2 1 , B anting began work under the direction of Professor JJ R Mac le od and assisted by Charles Best . " 

Layer 13 

Layer 7 

Layer 1 

Layer 19 

Layer 26 Figure 17: Example of Gemma3