Title: Bucketing the Good Apples: A Method for Diagnosing and Improving Causal Abstraction

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.02234v1

Published Time: Tue, 05 May 2026 01:54:15 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# BUCKETING THE GOOD APPLES :A M ETHOD FOR DIAGNOSING AND IMPROVING CAUSAL 

# ABSTRACTION 

Li Puyin ∗ ♢ , Jiyuan Tan ∗ ♢ , Ahmad Jabbar ♢, Thomas Icard † ♢ , Atticus Geiger † ♠ ♢Stanford University ♠Goodfire 

{puyinli, jiyuantan, jabbar, icard}@stanford.edu atticus@goodfire.ai 

# ABSTRACT 

We present a method for diagnosing interpretation in neural networks by identifying an input subspace where a proposed interpretation is highly faithful. Our method is particularly useful for causal-abstraction-style interpretability, where a high-level causal hypothesis is evaluated by interchange interventions. Rather than treating interchange intervention accuracy as a single global summary, we refine this framework by partitioning the input space into well-interpreted and under-interpreted regions according to pairwise interchange-intervention behavior. This turns causal abstraction from a purely global evaluation into a more diagnostic tool: it not only measures whether an interpretation works, but also reveals where it works, where it fails, and what distinguishes the two cases. This diagnostic view also provides practical heuristics for improving interpretations. By analyzing the structure of the well-interpreted and under-interpreted regions, we can identify missing distinctions in a high-level hypothesis, discover previously unmodeled intermediate variables, and combine complementary partial interpretations into a stronger one. We instantiate this idea as a simple four-step recipe and show that it yields informative error analyses across multiple causal abstraction settings. In a toy logic task, recursively applying the recipe recovers a high-level hypothesis from scratch. More broadly, our results suggest that partitioning the input space is a useful step toward more precise, constructive, and scalable mechanistic interpretability. 3

# 1 Introduction 

As Language Models (LMs) have scaled in complexity, the mechanistic interpretability community has developed a broad set of tools for studying the representations and algorithms underlying model behavior, including gradient-based attribution [Sundararajan et al., 2017], activation-based localization [Meng et al., 2022a,b], and feature decomposition with Sparse Autoencoders (SAEs) [Bricken et al., 2023, Cunningham et al., 2023]. Among these paradigms, causal abstraction provides a particularly rigorous framework: given a task, a high-level causal model and an alignment between high-level variables and internal neural representations, it asks whether the model and the hypothesis agree under counterfactual interventions [Geiger et al., 2021, 2025]. This framework has been shown to be suitable for a wide variety of tasks [Wu et al., 2024a, Arora et al., 2024, Huang et al., 2025, Boguraev et al., 2025]. In practice, causal abstraction is usually evaluated through interchange interventions , summarized by a single scalar metric, interchange intervention accuracy (IIA) [Geiger et al., 2021, 2025]. The IIA score provides a simple metric to measure how well hypotheses align with neural models, but it says little about where a hypothesis is faithful, and intermediate scores are especially hard to interpret [Makelov et al., 2023, Wu et al., 2024b, Méloux et al., 2025]. Moreover, although methods such as DAS make it easier to find candidate alignments, the overall workflow remains largely evaluative rather than constructive: it can tell us that a hypothesis is imperfect, but not how to improve it. 

> ∗

Equal first authorship. 

> †

Equal senior authorship. 

> 3

We provide the code base for this paper at https://github.com/Paulineli/apple-bucket .

> arXiv:2605.02234v1 [cs.AI] 4 May 2026

Bucketing the Good Apples: A Method for Diagnosing and Improving Causal Abstraction 

Figure 1: Four-step interpretation diagnosis pipeline. Given a causal abstraction for a task-performing model, we focus on task-correct inputs, identify an alignment, partition the input space by pairwise interchangeability, and train a classifier to generalize the diagnosis. We address this gap by shifting the unit of analysis from a global score to the structure of the input space. Given a low-level model L, a high-level hypothesis H, and an alignment Π, we partition the input space into well-interpreted 

target buckets with high IIA and a complementary bucket that captures the remaining failure modes. The key question is no longer just whether an abstraction works on average, but for which inputs it is actually faithful. This yields a more informative diagnosis and turns abstraction failures into evidence for refinement. Similar ideas of exploiting structure in observational or interventional partitions have appeared in causal feature learning [Chalupka et al., 2014, 2017]. Our main contribution is a practical four-step pipeline for diagnosing and improving causal abstractions: specify a reliable task and input space, obtain a candidate alignment, partition the input space by pairwise interchangeability to identify nearly interchange-consistent subsets, and train a classifier to generalize this diagnosis beyond the analyzed sample. Across fine-tuned and pretrained models of different sizes, and across alignment methods including full-vector patching, DAS, and MDAS, we show that this bucketing procedure is broadly useful for diagnosing causal abstractions. Empirically, we validate it on logic, entity binding [Gur-Arieh et al., 2025], and factual recall [Geva et al., 2021, Hernandez et al., 2023, Geva et al., 2023, Huang et al., 2024]. In the toy logic task, recursively applying the recipe supports iterative refinement of the high-level hypothesis itself, showing how causal abstraction can move from post hoc evaluation toward constructive hypothesis discovery. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the causal abstraction framework and the alignment and feature-learning tools used in this work. Section 3 formalizes interchange-consistent subsets and introduces our diagnosis pipeline. Section 4 evaluates the method on three settings of increasing complexity, and Section 5 concludes with limitations and future directions. 

# 2 Preliminaries 

Causally abstracting an LM involves hypothesizing and verifying that a higher-level causal model is an abstraction of the lower-level LM. Causal models—familiar from the literature on causal inference (e.g., Pearl 2009)—comprise variables, on which interventions predict counterfactual behavior. After hypothesizing alignments of the causal variables within LM representations and verifying the predicted counterfactual behavior for all such representations of an LM with appropriate interventions, the higher-level model can be taken to causally abstract the LM, if the corresponding interventions on the corresponding causal variables predict the same counterfactual output. We adopt notation from Geiger et al. [2023a]. 

Causal Abstraction. Specifically, we use H, L to represent a high-level and a low-level causal model, respectively. For each variable X, we notate its domain as VX . For X in H, (πX , τ X ) is an alignment that pairs a high-level variable X

with a set of low-level variables πX and maps variable values of ΠX to variable values of X, i.e., τX : Y

> Z∈πX

VZ → VX .2Bucketing the Good Apples: A Method for Diagnosing and Improving Causal Abstraction Moreover, we define an alignment Π of two models H, L as a collection of variable alignments, i.e., Π = ( {πX }, {τX }).Given a causal model M, we define MV ←v (x) to be the output of M with input x after setting V = v. For M, where 

{sk} is a source input setting and {Vk} is a set of intermediate variables, the interchange intervention ( II ) is defined as: 

II (M, {sk}, {Vk})( b) = MVk ←GetVals Vk (M(sk )) (b),

where GetVals Vk (M(sk)) is the value of variables V in model M(s). Similarly, one can define II with multiple sources as in Geiger et al. [2023a,b]. Ideally, we want the alignment Π to satisfy 

τ (II (L, s, π X )( b)) = II (H, τ (s), X )( τ (b)) .

Distributed Alignment Search (DAS). Standard-basis interventions implicitly assume that a high-level variable is localized in a particular set of neurons, but neural representations are often distributed across overlapping directions [Smolensky, 1986, Olah et al., 2020, Scherlis et al., 2022, Geiger et al., 2023b]. Distributed Alignment Search (DAS) addresses this by replacing “localist” alignment search with gradient-based search over distributed linear subspaces. Concretely, for a high-level variable X and a candidate low-level representation hπX ∈ Rn, DAS learns an orthogonal matrix Rθ and aligns X with a k-dimensional subspace of the rotated representation Rθ (hπX ), rather than with coordinates in the standard basis [Geiger et al., 2023b]. A distributed interchange intervention rotates the base and source representations, swaps the aligned subspace from source into base, and rotates back before continuing the forward pass. The low-level and high-level models are kept fixed; only the alignment parameters are trained so that the intervened low-level output matches the high-level intervention on X. As a variant of DAS, boundless DAS keeps the same objective of searching for better alignments, but replaces the hand-specified subspace size with learned soft boundaries, making the method more scalable [Wu et al., 2023]. 

Sparse Autoencoders (SAEs). To decompose the dense and polysemantic representations of a language model into interpretable components [Elhage et al., 2022], we leverage Sparse Autoencoders (SAEs) [Bricken et al., 2023, Cunningham et al., 2023]. An SAE provides a method for mapping an activation vector x ∈ Rd to a high-dimensional, sparse feature space f (x) ∈ Rm (where m ≫ d) via an encoder f (x) = ReLU (Wenc x + benc ), such that the original activation can be reconstructed as ˆx = Wdec f (x) + bdec . By training with an L1 penalty to enforce sparsity, SAEs identify features that often correspond to discrete semantic or syntactic concepts [Huang et al., 2024]. In our diagnostic pipeline, we use SAEs to extract model-internal features for our classifiers. 

# 3 Finding interchange-consistent Subsets 

Given a causal abstraction candidate (L, H, Π) and an input space I, we aim to identify regions of the input space on which the abstraction is fully faithful. Rather than summarizing abstraction quality with a single global IIA score, we seek a more structured view: which inputs are well interpreted by the current hypothesis, which are not, and how this distinction can be used to improve the hypothesis itself. This section proceeds in two parts. Section 3.1 formalizes interchange consistency at the level of input pairs and input subsets, yielding a graph-theoretic view of abstraction success and failure [Geiger et al., 2020a, Pîslar et al., 2025]. Section 3.2 then introduces a practical four-step diagnosis pipeline based on this structure to partition the input space and generalize the result beyond the analyzed sample. 

3.1 interchange-consistent Input Subset and the Interchangeability Graph 

Causal abstractions are typically evaluated using interchange intervention accuracy (IIA). Given a causal abstraction 

(L, H, Π) and a finite set of input pairs P, IIA is the proportion of pairs (i1, i 2) ∈ P for which the low-level intervention matches the corresponding high-level counterfactual for every variable in H (i.e., X ∈ Var (H)): 

τ (II (L, i 1, π X )( i2)) = II (H, τ (i1), X )( τ (i2)) .

While IIA is a useful global summary, it does not reveal how abstraction failures are distributed over the input space. To move beyond a single scalar score, we define a pairwise notion of exact success under interchange interventions and then lift it to subsets of inputs. 

Definition 1 (Interchange-Consistent Pairs) . Given a causal abstraction (L, H, Π) and an input set I, two inputs 

i1, i 2 ∈ I are interchange-consistent under (L, H, Π) , denoted p(H,L,Π) ⟨i1, i 2⟩, iff for all X ∈ Var (H),

τ (II (L, i 1, π X )( i2)) = II (H, τ (i1), X )( τ (i2)) ,τ (II (L, i 2, π X )( i1)) = II (H, τ (i2), X ) ( τ (i1)) .

Definition 1 requires exact counterfactual agreement in both directions: patching from i1 into i2, and from i2 into i1.We then lift this pairwise notion to subsets. 3Bucketing the Good Apples: A Method for Diagnosing and Improving Causal Abstraction 

Definition 2 (Interchange-Consistent Input Subset) . An input subset I ⊆ I is interchange-consistent by (L, H, Π) iff for all i1, i 2 ∈ I, p(H,L,Π) ⟨i1, i 2⟩ holds. 

Since we aim to find (quasi-)interchange-consistent input subsets 4 we refer to the resulting subsets as target buckets , we also refer to such subsets as target buckets . This setwise notion naturally admits a graph-theoretic reformulation. 

Definition 3 (Interchangeability Graph) . Given a causal abstraction (L, H, Π) and an input set I, the interchangeability graph is an undirected graph G = ( V, E ) with V = I. An edge connects two distinct vertices i1, i 2 ∈ V iff 

p(H,L,Π) ⟨i1, i 2⟩ holds. 

The interchangeability graph provides a map of where a candidate abstraction succeeds. A subset I ⊆ I is interchange-consistent iff every pair of vertices in I is connected by an edge; in graph-theoretic terms, such a subset is a clique. 

Definition 4 (Clique and Maximum Clique) . A set of vertices C ⊆ V in an undirected graph G = ( V, E ) is a clique if every pair of vertices in C is connected by an edge. A maximum clique is a clique of the largest possible size in G.

One immediate consequence is that a subset I ⊆ I is interchange-consistent by (L, H, Π) iff I forms a clique in the Interchangeability Graph. This reformulates the search for an exactly faithful region of the input space as a graph problem. 

3.2 The Diagnosis Pipeline 

We present a four-step diagnosis pipeline for turning a non-perfect causal abstraction into a more informative object of analysis. The central idea is to move from a single global IIA score to a partition of the input space: rather than asking only whether a hypothesis works on average, we ask where it works, where it fails, and what distinguishes the two regions. The pipeline is task-agnostic, but to make each step concrete, we illustrate it with a running toy logic example (Fig. 2). We use this example here only to show how a single diagnosis pass works for one target variable; in Section 4.1, we return to the same task and show how recursively reapplying the pipeline can recover a fuller high-level hypothesis. The complete diagnosis algorithm is shown in Algorithm 1 in the appendix. 

Step 1: Specify the task and the input space. The first step of the pipeline is to define a task and an input space I on which the low-level model L performs reliably. This isolates failures of interpretation from ordinary task failures. In practice, we therefore restrict attention to the subset of correct predictions: Icorrect = { i ∈ I : L(i) is task-correct }.

Example: In the toy logic task, we fine-tuned the model on a generated dataset of size 20 , 000 , where o1, o 2, o 3 are each true with probability 0.5. The model achieves 99 .7% test accuracy. We filtered out all the failure cases, and the input space consists of all instances where the model correctly predicts the truth value of o5.

Step 2: Find a candidate alignment. Next, given a high-level variable X, we identify a candidate alignment πX

between X and an intervenable low-level feature. This can be done using any standard alignment-search method, such as DAS or full-vector patching. At this stage, global IIA provides only a preliminary signal: if it is near-perfect, the hypothesis may already be adequate; if it is at chance, the candidate alignment is likely uninformative; but if it is intermediate, the result will need some further investigation. 

Example: We deliberately begin from an underspecified high-level hypothesis containing only the final output variable 

o5. DAS finds a near-perfect alignment at the final output position, but also an earlier candidate alignment at position 

77 , layer 7, with IIA approximately 0.78 . This is precisely the kind of intermediate result that motivates diagnosis: it is clearly above chance, yet far from sufficient to claim a globally faithful encoding of o5.

Step 3: Bucket the input space by interchangeability. We then ask whether a non-perfect alignment is faithful on some subset of the input space. To answer this, we construct the interchangeability graph over Icorrect , where two inputs are connected when they are interchange-consistent under the candidate abstraction. Rather than insisting on an exact maximum clique, in practice, we may relax the fully connected requirement and search for γ-quasi-cliques, which are subgraphs that have density larger than γ. We choose γ = 0 .98 in all experiments. We treat the dense quasi-clique as the “target bucket” and treat the remainder as “other bucket”. See Appendix A for details of the bucketing algorithm. 

Example: Applying this step to the candidate o5 alignment reveals that the alignment is not merely noisy. The well-interpreted bucket is dominated by inputs for which o1 ∧ o2 = False , so that the target computation simplifies to 

o5 = o3. On this subspace, a feature that tracks only the o3 branch can still appear faithful to the full output variable.          

> 4In our experiments, we usually search for quasi-interchange-consistent or γ-interchange-consistent input subsets rather than strict interchange-consistent subsets. A subset S⊆ I is γ-interchange-consistent if at least a γproportion of input pairs in Sare interchange-consistent. This relaxation reduces computational cost and avoids returning only trivially small subsets when a few failed interventions break an otherwise coherent high-faithfulness region.

4Bucketing the Good Apples: A Method for Diagnosing and Improving Causal Abstraction 

Figure 2: Running example – a toy logic task. We fine-tune a 12-layer GPT-2-small model to predict the truth value of o5 = (( t2̸ = t4) ∧ (t0̸ = t5)) ∨ (t1 = t3). For exposition, we denote the primitive Boolean variables (the (non)equalities) by o1, o 2, o 3, so that the target computation can be written as o5 = ( o1 ∧ o2) ∨ o3. The model is trained only on input-output pairs. This means the model can use different computations to get the same correct result (e.g., 

y = ( o1 ∧ o2) ∨ o3 vs. y = ( o1 ∨ o3) ∧ (o2 ∨ o3)). Therefore, the task serves as a clean testbed for asking which computation the model is actually using to solve the task. By contrast, the under-interpreted bucket is dominated by inputs for which o1 ∧ o2 = True , where that simplification no longer holds. The diagnosis therefore localizes a specific failure mode of the coarse output-only hypothesis. 

Step 4: Generalize and characterize the partition. Finally, we train a classifier g : I → { 1, . . . , K } to predict bucket membership for unseen inputs. The input to the classifier is a feature representation of each input, which can either be hand-labeled features describing the input, or model-internal features such as SAE, activations, or attribution-based features at the aligned site. The output is a bucket label indicating which bucket the input belongs to. This step serves two purposes: it tests whether the discovered buckets reflect a genuine structural boundary rather than an artifact of a finite intervention graph, and it helps characterize that boundary in terms of the features that best predict membership. 

Example: In the toy logic task, after bucketing the input space, we train two classifiers using bucket membership as the label. One takes the truth values of o1, o 2, o 3 as hand-labeled input features, and the other takes SAE features at the aligned position as model-internal input features. Both classifiers can predict the membership of unseen inputs, and their predictions are largely consistent. This indicates that the discovered partition reflects a stable structural distinction, and in particular that membership is indeed governed by whether the conjunction branch o4 = o1 ∧ o2 is active. Taken together, these four steps turn a single imperfect IIA score into a structured diagnosis. By deliberately aligning the output variable to a location with an imperfect but above baseline IIA, we identify buckets of inputs with high in-bucket and low cross-bucket IIA. This shows that this alignment is locally faithful within each bucket but collapses distinctions across buckets, indicating that the output variable can be further broken down into two intermediate variables. Figure 2 illustrates this first diagnosis pass on the toy logic task. 5Bucketing the Good Apples: A Method for Diagnosing and Improving Causal Abstraction 

Figure 3: Recursive hypothesis discovery in the toy logic task. Top: Diagnosing the candidate o5 alignment at position 77 , layer 7 partitions the input space into two high-IIA buckets separated by the latent variable o4 = o1 ∧ o2.

Middle: After promoting o4 to an explicit variable, DAS identifies both a near-perfect signal at position 81 , layer 7

and a non-trivial earlier signal at position 78 , layer 5. Bottom: Diagnosing the earlier o4 signal reveals o1 as the next missing component, recovering the complete hierarchy. 

# 4 Experiments 

We evaluate the diagnosis recipe in three settings of increasing complexity: a synthetic logic task, an entity-binding task adapted from prior work [Gur-Arieh et al., 2025], and an entangled factual recall setting based on the RAVEL benchmark [Huang et al., 2024]. In each case, we begin with an existing causal abstraction obtained using a standard alignment method, observe that its global IIA is informative but non-perfect, and then apply our partitioning procedure to identify buckets with high within-bucket and low cross-bucket IIA. We finally test whether these partitions generalize beyond the analyzed sample and whether they suggest useful refinements to the original abstraction. 

4.1 Recursive Hypothesis Discovery in the Toy Logic Task 

Section 3.2 established the first diagnosis pass for the toy logic task. Aligning o5 to position 77 , layer 7 partitions the input space into two buckets, both of which have high within-bucket IIA but low cross-bucket IIA. The partition has a clear semantic interpretation: in the target bucket, o4 = o1 ∧ o2 is always False , whereas in the other bucket, o4

is always True . This shows that the candidate o5 alignment does not represent the full output uniformly. Instead, it separates two regimes of computation, suggesting that o5 should be refined into two variables, o4 and o3.We then apply the same diagnosis procedure to o4. DAS identifies a near-perfect signal for o4 at position 81 , layer 7,indicating that the completed o4 computation can be localized there, and also a non-trivial above-baseline signal at position 78 , layer 5. We align o4 to this earlier site and repeat the bucketing step. The resulting partition again yields two buckets with high within-bucket IIA, and in the target bucket o1 is always False . This shows that the earlier o4 signal can itself be decomposed into the primitive components o1 and o2. Classifiers trained on both hand-labeled features and SAE features generalize these bucket assignments well, and their predictions are largely consistent, indicating that the discovered boundaries reflect stable structure rather than artifacts of a finite intervention graph. Taken together, these two passes recover the hierarchy o1, o 2, o 3 → o4 → o5. Starting from the output variable alone, recursive diagnosis spells out the full high-level causal hypothesis from top to bottom. In particular, it shows that the model solves the task via the intended factorization y = ( o1 ∧ o2) ∨ o3, rather than the extensionally equivalent alternative y = ( o1 ∨ o3) ∧ (o2 ∨ o3). Consistent with this picture, alignment search over all variables localizes o3 at position 77 , layer 7, and o1 at position 78 , layer 5 (Appendix B). 6Bucketing the Good Apples: A Method for Diagnosing and Improving Causal Abstraction 

4.2 Entity Binding Task 

Figure 4: Diagnosis of the Entity Binding Task in Gemma-2-2B-Instruct. Top Left: The entity-binding task evaluates in-context retrieval from sequences of templated groups (e.g., “John fills a cup with beer...”). A query (e.g., “Who filled a cup?”) then requests an entity from a specific group. We test a positional hypothesis : retrieval is mediated by a high-level variable qgroup representing the queried group’s context position. The model must identify this position and dereference it to retrieve the target entity. Bottom: Preliminary evaluation via full-vector patching at layer 15 reveals a U-shaped alignment curve as in Gur-Arieh et al. [2025]. Top Right: Our procedure constructs an interchangeability graph to isolate the well-interpreted and under-interpreted regions. This principled diagnosis recovers the failure mode automatically: the target bucket is dominated by edge groups ( qgroup ∈ { 0, 1, 2, 9}), while the other bucket contains medial groups ( qgroup ∈ { 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8}). 

Task and input space. We evaluate our framework using the entity-binding task [Geiger et al., 2020b, Gur-Arieh et al., 2025], where a model must retrieve specific entities from a sequence of templatic entity groups . We test the positional hypothesis —the idea that retrieval is mediated by a high-level variable qgroup representing the context position of the queried group—using the filling_liquids task with Gemma-2-2B-Instruct . Working within a 10-group input space I (where task accuracy exceeds 98% ), we leverage this setup (Fig. 4) to diagnose the model’s internal positional mechanism. The input space I comprises these correctly answered prompts, annotated by the queried group position and the fixed within-group roles. 

Alignment and Preliminary Evaluation. We replicate the positional-hypothesis experiment from Gur-Arieh et al. [2025], defining a high-level model where a single variable, qgroup , represents the queried group’s position. We localize the corresponding low-level site using vanilla patching and evaluate the hypothesis via full-vector patching at the final query position. Our preliminary results at layer 15 reveal a sharply non-uniform alignment curve, shown in Fig 4 , successfully reproducing the U-shape reported by Gur-Arieh et al. [2025]. The positional mechanism is highly faithful for entity groups at the sequence’s edges but degrades significantly for those in the middle. Because the resulting 7Bucketing the Good Apples: A Method for Diagnosing and Improving Causal Abstraction 

Figure 5: Entangled Factual Recall Task and Diagnosis. Top Left: This task utilizes the RAVEL benchmark to evaluate whether a specific entity attribute (e.g., L ANGUAGE ) can be isolated from other co-encoded attributes like COUNTRY , C ONTINENT , and T IMEZONE . It is particularly challenging because these features are often entangled within a single internal model state, making surgical intervention difficult. Bottom: MDAS Results. We train the alignment using all samples from all attributes to isolate the L ANGUAGE attribute and evaluate it on all attributes. Top Right: After partition, the "Target Buckets" correspond to regions where the representation is highly faithful for specific languages—English and Spanish—while the "Other Bucket" captures the remaining modes. global IIA is neither near-perfect nor near-chance, the aggregate scalar summary fails to characterize the specific input subspaces where the interpretation remains valid. This ambiguity underscores the need for a diagnostic procedure to isolate the well-interpreted regions of the input space. 

Bucketing the Input Space. We apply our partitioning procedure to the positional abstraction (L, Hpos , Π) . The overall density of the interchangeability graph is 24% , signaling that the abstraction is far from uniformly faithful across the entire input space. Upon partitioning this graph, a clear semantic pattern emerges (Fig 4 Upper Right). The well-interpreted bucket is dominated by inputs where the queried group is located at the start or end of the sequence, while the bad bucket is dominated by inputs in the middle. This diagnosis recovers the failure mode identified manually in Gur-Arieh et al. [2025]. The strength of our method is that this conclusion emerges directly from the structure of the intervention graph itself. Rather than manually inspecting per-index intervention curves, we obtain a principled partition of the input space into well-interpreted and under-interpreted regions. 

Generalization through classifier. To test whether this partition generalizes beyond the finite graph used for bucketing, we train classifiers to predict bucket membership for unseen in-distribution inputs. We train classifiers on both the queried group index and internal SAE features. The index-based classifier recovers an interpretable rule—assigning 

qgroup ∈ { 0, 1, 2, 9} to the target bucket and {3, . . . , 8} to the other bucket—attaining 90% IIA with 81% density (Fig 4, middle right). The SAE-based classifier further improves this to 98% IIA at 97% density (Fig 4, bottom right). That internal features outperform hand-labeled features suggests the distinction between inputs in different buckets is fundamentally encoded within the model’s own representations. 

Takeaway. This experiment demonstrates our framework’s ability to transform known mechanistic failures into reusable diagnostic objects. While the initial steps replicate the positional abstraction in Gur-Arieh et al. [2025], our bucketing procedure reveals that the hypothesis is not merely "imperfect" on average, but highly faithful on a structured subset while systematically unfaithful elsewhere. By generalizing this boundary to unseen inputs via classifiers, we find that internal SAE features outperform hand-labeled features. This recipe moves beyond reproducing known failure modes to effectively localize, characterize, and operationalize the boundaries of model interpretations. 8Bucketing the Good Apples: A Method for Diagnosing and Improving Causal Abstraction 

4.3 Entangled Factual Recall Task and input space. We evaluate our framework on entangled factual recall using the RAVEL benchmark [Huang et al., 2024]. This task tests the ability of interpretability methods to isolate a specific entity attribute from others co-encoded in the same representation (Fig. 5). This task is particularly challenging because attributes are often entangled within a single internal state, making it difficult to intervene on one without affecting others. Using a pretrained Llama-3.1-8B model, we focus on isolating the L ANGUAGE attribute from others. 

Alignment and Preliminary Evaluation A successful alignment in the R AVEL benchmark must satisfy two key properties: causal effectiveness and isolation.For a target attribute X ∈ A and its aligned representation ΠX mapped via 

τX , a high Cause score signifies that an interchange intervention II (M, s, ΠX )( b) successfully propagates the attribute value τX (s) from the source s into the model’s output for the base input b. Conversely, a high Iso (isolation) score ensures the intervention is surgically precise, remaining invariant to the states of extraneous features Y ∈ A \ { X}.The formal loss objectives are detailed in (1) and (2) in the appendix. While Multi-task Distributed Alignment Search (MDAS) is architected to jointly optimize these criteria, the resulting alignment yields a held-out Interchange Intervention Accuracy (IIA) of only 14.3%. This discrepancy identifies a central theoretical puzzle: despite MDAS being explicitly designed for attribute disentanglement , the learned subspace remains a fragile abstraction. This failure points to a structural mismatch that aggregate metrics cannot illuminate, necessitating our partitioning method to diagnose why the alignment fails to generalize beyond the training distribution 

Bucketing the input space. We next apply our bucketing procedure to the learned MDAS language subspace. The resulting intervention graph is sparse overall, with edge density only about 10% . Once we partition this graph, however, a clear structure emerges (Fig 5 right). The dense buckets correspond almost exactly to single-language regions: one bucket is dominated by English-speaking cities and Spanish-speaking cities, each with high IIA (around 98% ). The remaining cities fall into a diffuse “other languages” bucket with very low IIA. This shows that the learned MDAS subspace does not faithfully represent the L ANGUAGE attribute in general. Instead, it collapses the input space into a small number of coarse language-specific clusters, preserving interchangeability mainly within the same language while failing on cross-language interventions. 

Generalization through classifier. To test generalization, we train an SAE-based classifier to predict bucket membership for unseen inputs. The classifier reproduces the partition with 90% accuracy, confirming that the language-specific structure is indeed encoded in the model’s internal representations. Inspecting the highest-weight SAE features reveals only weak signals that are loosely consistent with the corresponding languages. These signals are far less direct than the buckets themselves: while reading SAE feature descriptions provides only weak, post hoc evidence, examining the grouped inputs in each bucket makes the underlying structure immediately clear. 

Takeaway. This experiment reveals a limitation of MDAS-style disentanglement in the entangled factual recall setting. Although MDAS is designed to isolate the target concept from correlated non-target attributes, our analysis shows that it can do so only by collapsing the target representation itself. The resulting subspace is partially isolated but only weakly faithful: it preserves coarse within-language structure while losing the finer-grained information needed for robust cross-language interchangeability. In this case, bucketing makes the failure mode explicit by showing that the learned representation separates a few major language clusters rather than capturing the L ANGUAGE attribute as a whole. 

# 5 Conclusion and Future Work 

We introduced a method for diagnosing and improving causal abstractions by bucketing the input space according to interchange-intervention behavior. Rather than treating IIA as a single global summary, our method identifies subsets of inputs on which a proposed abstraction is nearly perfect. This turns causal abstraction into a more diagnostic and constructive framework . Across fine-tuned and pretrained models of different sizes, and across alignment methods including DAS, MDAS, and full-vector patching, our experiments show that bucketing is a broadly applicable diagnostic tool for causal abstraction; in the toy logic task, it also supports iterative discovery of the high-level hypothesis itself. Our approach has two main limitations. First, it depends on a prior task construal: it operates within a specified task and candidate abstraction, rather than performing unconstrained automatic interpretation. In this sense, it is better understood as a structured program search than as a general solution to mechanistic interpretability. Second, our experiments focus on relatively simple, mostly single-variable hypotheses. In more complex settings, interacting variables and accumulated approximation error may make it difficult to discover large buckets with high IIA. These limitations suggest two natural directions for future work. One is to scale the method to richer tasks, larger input spaces, and higher-dimensional or genuinely multi-variable abstractions. Another is to better understand how bucketing can support more automated hypothesis discovery and refinement in non-trivial settings—for example, by turning the structure of identified buckets into a systematic search procedure over candidate variables, decompositions, and compositions of partial hypotheses. 9Bucketing the Good Apples: A Method for Diagnosing and Improving Causal Abstraction 

# Acknowledgements 

We thank Zhengxuan Wu for extensive guidance and support during the exploration phase of this project. We also thank Zhengxuan Wu, Nathan Roll, and Amir Zur for helpful comments and suggestions on earlier drafts of this paper. 

# References 

Aryaman Arora, Dan Jurafsky, and Christopher Potts. CausalGym: Benchmarking causal interpretability methods on linguistic tasks. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar, editors, Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 14638–14663, Bangkok, Thailand, 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.785 .Sasha Boguraev, Christopher Potts, and Kyle Mahowald. Causal interventions reveal shared structure across English filler–gap constructions. In Christos Christodoulopoulos, Tanmoy Chakraborty, Carolyn Rose, and Violet Peng, editors, Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 25032–25053, Suzhou, China, 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.emnlp-main. 1271/ .Adly Bricken, Adni Templeton, Joshua Batson, Brian Chen, Adam Jerome, Scott Moore, Shahar Tamkin, Landon Jones, Dustin Conerly, Hoagy Cunningham, et al. Towards monosemanticity: Decomposing language models with sparse autoencoders. Transformer Circuits Thread , 2023. Krzysztof Chalupka, Pietro Perona, and Frederick Eberhardt. Visual causal feature learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.2309 , 2014. Krzysztof Chalupka, Frederick Eberhardt, and Pietro Perona. Causal feature learning: an overview. Behaviormetrika ,44(1):137–164, 2017. Hoagy Cunningham, Aidan Ewart, Logan Riggs, Robert Huben, and Lee Sharkey. Sparse autoencoders find highly interpretable features in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08600 , 2023. Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Catherine Olsson, Nicholas Schiefer, Tom Henighan, Shauna Kravec, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Robert Lasenby, Dawn Drain, Carol Chen, et al. Toy models of superposition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.10652 ,2022. Atticus Geiger, Kyle Richardson, and Christopher Potts. Neural natural language inference models partially embed theories of lexical entailment and negation. In Proceedings of the Third BlackboxNLP Workshop on Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP , pages 163–173, Online, November 2020a. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.blackboxnlp-1.16. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020. blackboxnlp-1.16 .Atticus Geiger, Kyle Richardson, and Christopher Potts. Neural natural language inference models partially embed theories of lexical entailment and negation. In Proceedings of the third blackboxnlp workshop on analyzing and interpreting neural networks for NLP , pages 163–173, 2020b. Atticus Geiger, Hanson Lu, Thomas Icard, and Christopher Potts. Causal abstractions of neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:9574–9586, 2021. Atticus Geiger, Duligur Ibeling, Amir Zur, Maheep Chaudhary, Sonakshi Chauhan, Jing Huang, Aryaman Arora, Zhengxuan Wu, Noah Goodman, Christopher Potts, et al. Causal abstraction: A theoretical foundation for mechanistic interpretability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04709 , 2023a. Atticus Geiger, Zhengxuan Wu, Christopher Potts, Thomas Icard, and Noah Goodman. Finding alignments between interpretable causal variables and distributed neural representations. 2023b. Atticus Geiger, Duligur Ibeling, Amir Zur, Maheep Chaudhary, Sonakshi Chauhan, Jing Huang, Aryaman Arora, Zhengxuan Wu, Noah Goodman, Christopher Potts, et al. Causal abstraction: A theoretical foundation for mechanistic interpretability. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 26(83):1–64, 2025. Mor Geva, Roei Schuster, Jonathan Berant, and Omer Levy. Transformer feed-forward layers are key-value memories. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 5484–5495, 2021. Mor Geva, Jasmijn Bastings, Katja Filippova, and Amir Globerson. Dissecting recall of factual associations in auto-regressive language models. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 12216–12235, 2023. Yoav Gur-Arieh, Mor Geva, and Atticus Geiger. Mixing mechanisms: How language models retrieve bound entities in-context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.06182 , 2025. 10 Bucketing the Good Apples: A Method for Diagnosing and Improving Causal Abstraction Zhengfu He, Wentao Shu, Xuyang Ge, Lingjie Chen, Junxuan Wang, Yunhua Zhou, Frances Liu, Qipeng Guo, Xuanjing Huang, Zuxuan Wu, et al. Llama scope: Extracting millions of features from llama-3.1-8b with sparse autoencoders. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.20526 , 2024. Evan Hernandez, Arnab Sen Sharma, Tal Haklay, Kevin Meng, Martin Wattenberg, Jacob Andreas, Yonatan Belinkov, and David Bau. Linearity of relation decoding in transformer language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.09124 ,2023. Jing Huang, Zhengxuan Wu, Christopher Potts, Mor Geva, and Atticus Geiger. Ravel: Evaluating interpretability methods on disentangling language model representations. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 8669–8687, 2024. Jing Huang, Junyi Tao, Thomas Icard, Diyi Yang, and Christopher Potts. Internal causal mechanisms robustly predict language model out-of-distribution behaviors. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. Tom Lieberum, Senthooran Rajamanoharan, Arthur Conmy, Lewis Smith, Nicolas Sonnerat, Vikrant Varma, János Kramár, Anca Dragan, Rohin Shah, and Neel Nanda. Gemma scope: Open sparse autoencoders everywhere all at once on gemma 2. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.05147 , 2024. Aleksandar Makelov, Georg Lange, and Neel Nanda. Is this the subspace you are looking for? an interpretability illusion for subspace activation patching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.17030 , 2023. Maxime Méloux, Silviu Maniu, François Portet, and Maxime Peyrard. Everything, everywhere, all at once: is mechanistic interpretability identifiable? arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.20914 , 2025. Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and editing factual associations in GPT. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2022a. Kevin Meng, Arnab Sen Sharma, Alex Andonian, Yonatan Belinkov, and David Bau. Mass-editing memory in a transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.07229 , 2022b. Chris Olah, Nick Cammarata, Ludwig Schubert, Gabriel Goh, Michael Petrov, and Shan Carter. Zoom in: An introduction to circuits. Distill , 2020. doi: 10.23915/distill.00024.001. https://distill.pub/2020/circuits/zoom-in. Judea Pearl. Causality . Cambridge university press, 2009. Theodora-Mara Pîslar, Sara Magliacane, and Atticus Geiger. Combining causal models for more accurate abstractions of neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.11429 , 2025. Adam Scherlis, Kshitij Sachan, Adam S. Jermyn, Joe Benton, and Buck Shlegeris. Polysemanticity and capacity in neural networks. CoRR , abs/2210.01892, 2022. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2210.01892. URL https://doi.org/10. 48550/arXiv.2210.01892 .Paul Smolensky. Neural and conceptual interpretation of pdp models. Parallel distributed processing: Explorations in the microstructure of cognition , 2:390–431, 1986. Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In International conference on machine learning , pages 3319–3328. PMLR, 2017. Zhengxuan Wu, Atticus Geiger, Thomas Icard, Christopher Potts, and Noah Goodman. Interpretability at scale: Identifying causal mechanisms in alpaca. 2023. Zhengxuan Wu, Atticus Geiger, Aryaman Arora, Jing Huang, Zheng Wang, Noah D Goodman, Christopher D Manning, and Christopher Potts. pyvene: A library for understanding and improving pytorch models via interventions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07809 , 2024a. Zhengxuan Wu, Atticus Geiger, Jing Huang, Aryaman Arora, Thomas Icard, Christopher Potts, and Noah D Goodman. A reply to makelov et al.(2023)’s" interpretability illusion" arguments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.12631 , 2024b. 

# A Methodology 

The formal diagnosis pipeline is shown in Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2. 

Greedy Multi-Seed Quasi-Clique Search As the identification of maximum cliques within the Interchangeability Graph is generally NP-hard, we implement a heuristic greedy search to approximate the interchange-consistent (perfectly interpreted) subspaces (Algorithm 2). This algorithm serves as the implementation of the F IND MAXIMAL QUASI -CLIQUE function within our diagnosis pipeline. To maximize the probability of discovering large dense regions, the algorithm employs a multi-seed strategy starting from the most promising candidates. We first compute the degrees of all nodes in V ⊆ I correct based on the current 11 Bucketing the Good Apples: A Method for Diagnosing and Improving Causal Abstraction subgraph and sort them in descending order. The expansion is then attempted independently for each of the top 10 highest-degree nodes as seeds. For a given seed, the algorithm iteratively expands the set C by selecting the candidate node w that maximizes the resulting edge density ρ, provided that ρ remains above the user-defined threshold γ.The density threshold γ ∈ (0 , 1] allows the framework to be robust to minor representational noise; while γ = 1 .0

identifies a perfect clique, a slightly lower value (e.g., γ = 0 .9) allows the pipeline to isolate regions of high causal faithfulness that might otherwise be fragmented by trivial neural variations. We choose γ = 0 .98 for all experiments in the paper. The algorithm tracks the results of each seed and returns the largest quasi-clique Cbest , which is then extracted as a “Target Bucket” before the search space is updated for the next iteration. 

Algorithm 1 The Diagnosis Pipeline 

Require: Causal abstraction (L, H, Π) , input space I, density threshold γ, max buckets K 

> 1:

Icorrect ← { i ∈ I : L(i) is correct } 

> 2:

Construct Interchangeability Graph G = ( V, E ) on Icorrect using Eq. 1  

> 3:

for j = 1 to K − 1 do  

> 4:

Cj ← FIND MAXIMAL QUASI CLIQUE (G, γ ) # Identify a dense, faithful region  

> 5:

if Cj = ∅ then  

> 6:

break  

> 7:

end if  

> 8:

V ← V \ Cj # Remove identified region from the search space  

> 9:

end for  

> 10:

CK ← V # Residual bucket of failure modes  

> 11:

Dtrain ← { (i, j ) | i ∈ Cj , j ∈ { 1, . . . , K }}  

> 12:

g ← TRAIN CLASSIFIER (Dtrain ) # Learn to generalize the partition  

> 13:

return Buckets {Cj }Kj=1 and diagnostic classifier g

Algorithm 2 Multi-Seed Greedy Quasi-Clique Search 

Require: Adjacency matrix A, available nodes V ⊆ I correct , density threshold γ, minimum size s 

> 1:

if |V | < s then  

> 2:

return ∅ 

> 3:

end if  

> 4:

Compute degrees of nodes in V based on subgraph G[V ] 

> 5:

Vsorted ← nodes in V sorted by degree descending  

> 6:

Cbest ← ∅  

> 7:

for vseed in Vsorted [1 . . . min(10 , |V |)] do  

> 8:

C ← { vseed }; S ← V \ { vseed } 

> 9:

improved ← True  

> 10:

while improved and S̸ = ∅ do  

> 11:

improved ← False  

> 12:

u∗ ← None; ρ∗ ← 0 

> 13:

for w in S do  

> 14:

ρ ← Density (C ∪ { w}) 

> 15:

if ρ ≥ γ and ρ > ρ ∗ then  

> 16:

u∗ ← w; ρ∗ ← ρ; improved ← True  

> 17:

end if  

> 18:

end for  

> 19:

if improved then  

> 20:

C ← C ∪ { u∗}; S ← S \ { u∗} 

> 21:

end if  

> 22:

end while  

> 23:

if |C| ≥ s and |C| > |Cbest | then  

> 24:

Cbest ← C 

> 25:

end if  

> 26:

end for  

> 27:

return Cbest 

12 Bucketing the Good Apples: A Method for Diagnosing and Improving Causal Abstraction 

# B Appendix: Toy Logic Task Details 

B.1 Task Specification and Dataset 

The toy logic task is designed as a controlled synthetic setting where the target computation is perfectly specified by a known Boolean expression. The model is presented with a sequence of six input tokens, t0, . . . , t 5, drawn uniformly from a predefined vocabulary. The target label is defined by the high-level causal model H, which computes the expression o5 = (( t2̸ = t4) ∧ (t0̸ = t5)) ∨ (t1 = t3).For our analysis, we explicitly define the intermediate causal variables as follows: 

o1 := ( t2̸ = t4)

o2 := ( t0̸ = t5)

o3 := ( t1 = t3)

o4 := o1 ∧ o2

o5 := o4 ∨ o3

Dataset Construction To format the inputs for the language model, we use an in-context learning template. Each prompt consists of 5 randomly sampled context examples (with their corresponding ground-truth Boolean labels) to establish the task format, followed by the target six-token sequence formatted as “ t0,t1,t2,t3,t4,t5= ”. The dataset is constructed such that the intermediate variables (e.g., o3) are balanced to be True with a probability of approximately 0.5. We train a 12-layer GPT-2-small (∼117M parameters) on 2048 such examples, achieving 99.7% task accuracy. Before any alignment search or graph construction, we rigorously filter the dataset to the Icorrect subset: we ensure that the model correctly predicts both the base input and the source input in isolation, verifying that any downstream failure under interchange intervention stems strictly from the alignment hypothesis, not from base model incompetence. 

B.2 Experimental Setup: Alignment Search 

We use DAS to map the high-level variables ( o4, o5) to the model’s internal representations. We utilize the pyvene 

library to train DAS. The results are shown in Fig. 6. 

Training Details Because the causal variables are binary, we train a 1-dimensional orthogonal rotation matrix (subspace_dimension=1 ) operating on the block output. For each candidate layer and token position, we train the DAS intervention for 5 epochs using the Adam optimizer (learning rate = 0.001 ) with a batch size of 32. The objective minimizes the Cross-Entropy loss between the model’s counterfactual output and the target causal model’s predicted counterfactual label. 

B.3 Diagnostic Graph Construction 

Once the optimal candidate layer and position for an intermediate variable are identified via DAS, we construct the Interchangeability Graph to diagnose the alignment’s structural faithfulness. For N sampled inputs from the filtered dataset, we perform exhaustive directed interventions for all pairs (i, j ) using the trained DAS weight. An undirected edge is drawn between node i and node j if and only if the interchange intervention succeeds bidirectionally—meaning the model accurately predicts the counterfactual output when patching from i → j, and independently when patching from j → i.

Partitioning We partition the resulting graph using a heuristic multi-seed greedy quasi-clique search (Algorithm 2). To accommodate slight representational noise inherent to neural activations, we apply a density threshold of γ = 0 .98 

and a minimum clique size of 2. The resulting clusters explicitly separate the input space into perfectly-interpreted (interchange-consistent) regions and under-interpreted regions. 

B.4 SAE-Based Generalization and Classification 

To determine if the boundaries of the perfectly interpreted subspaces are explicitly encoded in the model’s feature space, we train classifiers using SAE features to predict bucket membership. 

Feature Extraction and Classification For the nodes in the intervention graph, we extract the residual-stream activations at the targeted layer and token position. We encode these activations using pretrained SAEs for GPT-2 13 Bucketing the Good Apples: A Method for Diagnosing and Improving Causal Abstraction 

Figure 6: DAS Alignment Heat Maps for o1, o 2, o 3, o 4.Small (specifically, the gpt2-small-res-jb release from sae_lens ). Using the resulting sparse feature activations, we train an ℓ1-regularized Logistic Regression classifier on an 80/20 train/test split. The model is trained to classify whether an input belongs to the perfectly-interpreted bucket or the other bucket. The high test accuracy of this classifier and the sparse set of non-zero ℓ1 coefficients allow us to identify the specific features (such as o4) that dictate whether the high-level causal hypothesis holds. 

# C Entity Binding Task Details 

C.1 Task Specification and Dataset 

We instantiate the entity binding task using the filling_liquids task family. In this setting, the model is provided with a prompt containing 10 distinct entity groups. Each group follows a fixed template: "[Person] fills a [Container] with [Liquid]." The prompt concludes with a query such as "Who filled the [Container]?" , requiring the model to retrieve the specific [Person] associated with that container from the preceding context. 

Entity Pools To ensure high diversity and minimize accidental overlaps, we utilize the following entity pools: • Persons: John, Mary, Bob, Sue, Tim, Kate, Dan, Lily, Max, Eva, Sam, Zoe, Leo, Mia, Noah, Ava, Ben, Liz, Tom, Joy. • Containers: cup, glass, bottle, mug, jar, pitcher, bowl, flask, tumbler, chalice, vessel, container, tank, can, tube, vial, goblet, stein, carafe, decanter. • Liquids: beer, wine, water, juice, milk, coffee, tea, soda, lemonade, smoothie, soup, broth, sauce, syrup, oil, honey, cider, nectar, punch, tonic. 

Dataset Construction We generate a dataset of 1,024 samples. Following our diagnostic pipeline, we filter this dataset to include only instances where Gemma-2-2B-Instruct correctly predicts the target entity for both the base and counterfactual inputs. After filtering, the dataset is split into training (80%) and testing (20%) sets. 14 Bucketing the Good Apples: A Method for Diagnosing and Improving Causal Abstraction 

C.2 Experimental Setup 

We use pyvene to conduct vanilla interchange interventions. We test the positional hypothesis , which posits that the model’s retrieval mechanism is mediated by a high-level variable qgroup representing the context position of the queried group. 

Alignment Procedure Counterfactuals are generated by swapping the positions of entity groups while maintaining the templatic structure. We perform full-vector patching on the residual stream at the final query token position across all layers. A faithful abstraction requires that patching the internal representation from a source input into a base input causes the model to retrieve the entity corresponding to the source’s queried group position. 

C.3 Diagnostic Results 

We sample 512 correctly answered prompts from the filling_liquids input space, perform pairwise interchange interventions, and construct an Interchangeability Graph whose vertices represent individual inputs. We analyze the resulting IIA to construct the interchangeability graph shown in Fig. 7. 

Figure 7: Interchangeability Graph for Entity Binding. The graph nodes represent individual inputs, and edges denote perfect pairwise interchangeability. The emergent community structure corresponds to the "Target Buckets" where the positional hypothesis is perfectly faithful, primarily at the start and end of the prompt sequence. For the classification step of our diagnosis, we utilize internal features from Gemma Scope Lieberum et al. [2024] to determine if the boundaries between well-interpreted and under-interpreted regions are explicitly encoded in the model’s feature space. 

# D Entangled Factual Recall Task Details 

D.1 Task Specification and Dataset 

We evaluate the entangled factual recall setting using the RAVEL benchmark [Huang et al., 2024] on the Llama-3.1-8B 

model. We focus on the L ANGUAGE attribute of the city entity type. The input space consists of prompts where the base and source inputs share the exact same template but differ only in the city name (e.g., "People in San Francisco speak..." vs. "People in Paris speak..." ). To ensure our interventions target the specific entity representation, we extract the residual stream activations at the final token of the city name. The dataset is filtered to strictly include instances where the base model correctly predicts the factual target. The filtered dataset is then split into an 80% training set and a 20% testing set. 

D.2 Experimental Setup: MDAS 

We employ Multi-task Distributed Alignment Search (MDAS) to learn a disentangled subspace that isolates the LANGUAGE attribute from other co-encoded attributes (C ONTINENT , C OUNTRY , L ATITUDE , L ONGITUDE , and TIMEZONE ). 15 Bucketing the Good Apples: A Method for Diagnosing and Improving Causal Abstraction 

MADS Loss Following Huang et al. [2024], given an entity E and an attribute A with a ground-truth value AE

(e.g., P ARIS and C ONTINENT ), we seek to learn a feature FA. A high Cause score indicates that intervening on this representation successfully transfers a source attribute value AE′ from a counterfactual input x′ to the model’s prediction for a base input x, optimized as: 

LCause (A, F A, M) = CE (II (M, F A, x, x ′), A E′ ) (1) Conversely, a high Iso (isolation) score ensures the intervention is surgical and does not alter other attributes A∗ ∈A \ { A}. For a prompt x∗ querying a different attribute A∗ with ground-truth value A∗ 

> E

(e.g., L ANGUAGE ), the isolation loss ensures the model still predicts the original value A∗ 

> E

despite the intervention on FA:

LIso (A, F A, M) = 1

|A \ { A}| 

X

> A∗∈A\{ A}

CE (II (M(x∗), F A, x ′), A ∗ 

> E

) (2) The MDAS training loss is the summation of LCause and LIso .

Training Details Rather than exhaustively training across all layers, we first perform a coarse search using a large layer gap across subspace dimensions k ∈ { 32 , 128 , 512 , 2048 }. Based on the preliminary alignment results from this initial sweep, we zoom in on the most promising regions to localize the optimal subspace and identify layer 14 as the ideal intervention site. To optimize for both causal transfer and isolation, we construct a weighted training distribution: pairs evaluating the target attribute (L ANGUAGE ) are sampled at a 5:1 ratio compared to pairs evaluating the other five off-target attributes. This forces the subspace to maximize the interchange intervention accuracy (IIA) for L ANGUAGE 

while ensuring interventions do not alter the model’s predictions for queries about a city’s continent or timezone. 

Figure 8: MDAS Alignment Results for Entangled Factual Recall Task 

D.3 Diagnostic Results and Classification 

Following the MDAS optimization, we apply our diagnostic pipeline to the test set. 

Graph Construction and Partition We perform exhaustive pairwise interchange interventions. An undirected edge is formed between two inputs if and only if the bidirectional interchange intervention (source → base, and base →

source) is perfectly consistent with the high-level causal model. We partition this graph using Algorithm 2 with a density threshold of γ = 0 .98 and a minimum clique size of 2, which successfully isolates the language-specific clusters (English, Spanish) discussed in the main text. We find that with fewer buckets, the partition first separates English from non-English cities, and then Spanish splits off as a second clean group. 

SAE-Based Generalization To test if these boundaries are encoded in the model’s internal feature space, we train a classifier using sparse features from Llama Scope [He et al., 2024]. We extract the residual stream activations at layer 14 for the graph nodes and encode them through the corresponding Llama SAE. Using the resulting sparse feature activations, we train a multi-class ℓ1-regularized Logistic Regression classifier to predict the quasi-clique bucket labels. To interpret the structural differences between buckets, we extract the highest-weight SAE features by analyzing the ℓ1 coefficients. 16